International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: 1044-7318 (Print) 1532-7590 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hihc20
Identifying Causes of and Solutions for
Cybersickness in Immersive Technology:
Reformulation of a Research and Development
Agenda
Kay Stanney, Ben D. Lawson, Bas Rokers, Mark Dennison, Cali Fidopiastis,
Thomas Stoﬀregen, Séamas Weech & Jacqueline M. Fulvio
To cite this article: Kay Stanney, Ben D. Lawson, Bas Rokers, Mark Dennison, Cali Fidopiastis,
Thomas Stoﬀregen, Séamas Weech & Jacqueline M. Fulvio (2020) Identifying Causes of
and Solutions for Cybersickness in Immersive Technology: Reformulation of a Research
and Development Agenda, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 36:19,
1783-1803, DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
© 2020 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 04 Nov 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 14502
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 97 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20
SURVEY ARTICLE
Identifying Causes of and Solutions for Cybersickness in Immersive Technology: 
Reformulation of a Research and Development Agenda
Kay Stanneya, Ben D. Lawsonb, Bas Rokersc, Mark Dennisond, Cali Fidopiastisa, Thomas Stoffregene, Séamas Weechf, 
and Jacqueline M. Fulviog
aDesign Interactive, Inc, USA; bNaval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory, Groton, USA; cPsychology, New York University, Abu Dhabi, UAE; dU.S. 
Army Combat Capabilities Development Command, Army Research Laboratory, USA; eSchool of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
USA; fSchool of Physical and Occupational Therapy, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; gDepartment of Psychology, University of Wisconsin- 
Madison, Madison, USA
ABSTRACT
Immersive technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality, initially failed to live up to expecta -
tions, but have improved greatly, with many new head-worn displays and associated applications 
being released over the past few years. Unfortunately, ‘cybersickness’ remains as a common user 
problem that must be overcome if mass adoption is to be realized. This article evaluates the state of 
research on this problem, identifies challenges that must be addressed, and formulates an updated 
cybersickness research and development (R&D) agenda. The new agenda recommends prioritizing 
creation of powerful, lightweight, and untethered head-worn displays, reduction of visual latencies, 
standardization of symptom and aftereffect measurement, development of improved countermea -
sures, and improved understanding of the magnitude of the problem and its implications for job 
performance. Some of these priorities are unresolved problems from the original agenda which 
should get increased attention now that immersive technologies are proliferating widely. If the 
resulting R&D agenda is carefully executed, it should render cybersickness a challenge of the past 
and accelerate mass adoption of immersive technologies to enhance training, performance, and 
recreation.
1.Introduction: Identifying causes of and solutions 
for cybersickness: Reformulation of a research and 
development agenda
Virtual and augmented reality (AR) technology provides sen-
sory input to users that often simulates real-world stimuli. 
The approaches taken by virtual and augmented reality are 
slightly different. Virtual reality (VR) aims to substitute vir-
tual for real stimulation for one or more sensory organs. 
Augmented reality, on the other hand, blends real and virtual 
stimulation. Of course, surreal stimuli can be added to VR or 
AR as well. In any of these cases, virtual aspects of sensory 
input are presented with the goal of having users interact with 
them as if they are real.
Following industry practice, we will use the term 
eXtended reality (XR) when we refer to the shared aspects 
of virtual and augmented reality. eXtended Reality could 
transform the way we work, learn, and play. Besides its 
wide use in entertainment and gaming, XR has significant 
applications in the domains of education, manufacturing, 
training, health care, retail, and tourism (Stanney et al., 
2020 ). It can transform education by permitting interaction 
with environments far removed, long gone, or of a dramatically different scale. It provides operational sup-
port at the point-of-need, thereby accelerating task perfor -
mance while improving safety and reducing downtime and 
costs. It allows for training of essential skills through safe, 
contextually relevant, and embodied immersive experiences, 
even in rare and hazardous scenarios, such as training oil 
rig workers to handle emergencies or sailors to put out ship 
fires. It can support physicians in reaching patients in 
underserved and remote areas, and support diagnostics, 
surgical planning, and image-guided treatment. It is des-
tined to reshape commerce, by supporting remote explora -
tion of physical products, enhancing remote customer 
support, and fostering interactive branding. It can also 
revolutionize tourism via the integration of interactive ele-
ments into hotel experiences, augmented tourist points-of- 
interest, and immersive navigation assistance when explor -
ing new places.
Despite the vast promise XR technology presents, 
a nettlesome motion sickness (a.k.a. cybersickness) problem 
exists (McCauley & Sharkey, 1992 ). The cybersickness asso-
ciated with XR exposure often includes nausea, disorientation, 
oculomotor disturbances, drowsiness (a.k.a. sopite syndrome), 
CONTACT Kay Stanney 
 kay@designinteractive.net 
 Design Interactive, Inc., Orlando, FL 32789, USA 
This article was originally published with errors, which have now been corrected in the online version. Please see Correction (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318. 
2020.1865601 )INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
2020, VOL. 36, NO. 19, 1783–1803
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
© 2020 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), which permits 
unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
and other discomforts (Graybiel & Knepton, 1976 ; Stanney 
et al., 2014 ). At least 5% of VR users will not be able to 
tolerate prolonged exposure, and ~1% of users will experience 
retching or vomiting, typically during prolonged exposure to 
a fully immersive VR headset (Stanney et al., 2003 ; Lawson, 
2014 ).
Cybersickness can linger long after XR exposure and compro -
mise postural stability, hand-eye coordination, visual functioning, 
and general well-being. These aftereffects generally result from the 
individual’s sensorimotor adaptation to the immersive experience, 
which is a natural and automatic response to an intersensorily 
imperfect virtual experience and is elicited (and often resolved) by 
the plasticity of the human nervous system, which recalibrates 
continuously to new inputs (Stanney et al., 1998 ). It is speculated 
that the problem is less severe in AR, as compared to VR, but that 
assumption has yet to be fully validated.
To discuss potential solutions for cybersickness, a special ses-
sion was held at the 1997 Human Computer Interaction (HCI) 
International Conference . As a result of that (largely NASA- 
sponsored) session, a research and development (R&D) agenda 
was formulated (Stanney et al., 1998 ). High priority recommenda -
tions included developing an understanding of the role of sensory 
discordance, employing human adaptation schedules, developing 
and implementing design guidelines to minimize sensory con-
flicts, developing standardized subjective and objective measures 
of aftereffects to quantify the problem, establishing countermea -
sures to sensory cue conflicts, and improving head tracking tech-
nology and system response latency. Since that session, significant 
advances have been made in our understanding of the causes 
underlying cybersickness and technology facilitating XR applica -
tions. To evaluate progress since the 1997 special session, assess the 
current state of the field, and identify future challenges, 
a workshop entitled Cybersickness: Causes and Solutions was con-
vened in Los Angeles CA, at the SIGGRAPH 2019 conference 
(Special Interest Group on Computer GRAPHics and Interactive 
Techniques ). This paper engages the participants from that work -
shop in formulating an updated R&D agenda, three of whom 
participated in the development of the original 1998 agenda.
2.Consolidation of the literature (Lawson and 
Stanney)
2.1. Cybersickness revisited: The rationale for this paper
Immersive technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality, 
initially failed to live up to inflated expectations. They have since 
improved greatly, traveling along the popular (but hypothetical) 
Gartner Hype Cycle of innovation (Linden & Fenn, 2003 ) and 
emerging from the “trough of disillusionment” (p. 2), which con-
tributed to waning interest in the 1990s. These immersive tech-
nologies appear to be nearing the “plateau of productivity” (p. 2), 
with mainstream adoption on the horizon. Unfortunately, cyber -
sickness (a type of motion sickness associated with prolonged 
immersion) remains as a common user problem that stands in 
the way. Stanney et al. (1998 ) described key cybersickness-related 
R&D problems that would need to be solved before VR technology 
could live up to its potential and achieve mass adoption. This paper 
garnered much interest, but is due for an update, as VR and AR 
systems are now commercially available that are of acceptable quality and are more affordable than some smartphones today. 
In fact, the time has finally come when tens of millions of XR 
headsets have been sold worldwide, but mentions of unpleasant 
symptoms are emerging again in the news and are regularly 
discussed on blog posts. Therefore, it is appropriate to revisit the 
cybersickness problems discussed by Stanney et al. (1998 ) and to 
identify any needed modifications to the recommended R&D 
agenda.
2.2. Are we seeing the rebirth of XR now or merely 
another hype cycle?
The original Stanney et al. (1998 ) paper cited a prediction that 
VR would be widespread by approximately 2008. It appears 
that true dissemination did not begin until nearly a decade 
later than predicted, but it is now fully underway. The evi-
dence that XR is undergoing a revival derives from Google 
Trends searches, unit sales statistics, and research publication 
trends, which are described below.
Google Trends searches reveal that VR interest did not rise 
steeply until the mid-2010s (see Figure 1a screen captures 
from trends.google.com ). Interest rose quickly following the 
2013 introduction of the earliest developer version of the 
Oculus Rift. For the first time, users had access to VR of 
acceptable quality for under 500 USD which created 
a tipping point for sales, with several competitor VR headsets 
marketed shortly thereafter. Interest in AR was already sur-
ging at that time and has remained strong (see Figure 1b), 
while interest in VR has waned a bit in recent years, perhaps 
because of consistent reports of cybersickness, and the need to 
completely remove a user from real-world viewing. This is 
reflected in the latest headset usage estimates, with 
52.1 million people anticipated to use VR, as compared to 
83.1 million anticipated to use AR at least once per month in 
2020 (Petrock, 2020 ).
The Google Trends searches above are fairly consistent 
with evidence concerning the increasing sales curve of VR 
and AR around this same time (Dunn, 2017 ), as units num -
bered in the millions worldwide and are projected to become 
even more common by 2024 (see Table 1).
The surge in general interest and sales of XR appears to 
match the increase in studies by research and technical 
Figure 1. Popularity of search terms “virtual reality” (1a) and “Augmented 
Reality” (1b), Implying a resurgence of interest in VR ca. 2015 and a Growing 
Interest in AR ca. 2011. (Peak popularity is assigned 100, 50% of this peak is 
assigned 50, etc.).1784
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
groups, as reflected by the growing number of Google Scholar 
Articles from 1998 to 2019 focused on “virtual reality” and 
“augmented reality” (see Figure 2).
Considering the trends described above for Google Trends 
searches, usage statistics, unit sales, and scholarly publica -
tions, we can assert that the age of ubiquitous XR technology 
finally seems to have arrived. Only time will tell if sales will 
continue to grow as predicted (Dunn, 2017 ; IDC, 2020 ). Will 
the years 2015–2020 someday be considered the “renaissance 
of XR,” or merely another “hype bubble?” The answer to this 
question will depend upon the existence of useful XR software 
applications and alleviation of cybersickness. As was recom -
mended in the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda, more value- 
added, widely adopted enterprise applications for AR and VR 
are still needed today to ensure XR dissemination, so the 
present authors feel this should be maintained in the current 
updated R&D agenda:
●Identify and evaluate value-added XR applications, both 
personal and collaborative.●Develop value-added enterprise XR applications that 
drive mass adoption.
Beyond value-added applications, the authors believe that 
one of the most important factors determining mass adop -
tion of XR technology is cybersickness. Interest in cybersick -
ness was high in the early 2000s (see Figure 3a), likely due to 
VR disenchantment following the over-hyping of VR cap-
abilities in the 1990s and a growing popular awareness of 
how commonly cybersickness was induced (Stanney et al., 
1998 ). Concomitant with the increasing recent XR sales and 
usage, there has been a resurgence of interest in searches for 
the word “cybersickness.” This trend cannot be explained by 
a similar recent surge in interest in analogous maladies such 
as “simulator sickness” (see Figure 3b). The authors conjec -
ture that interest in cybersickness is surging because there 
are far more XR users now, yet the modern XRs they use still 
cause cybersickness. This malady must be resolved if XR 
technology is to experience mass adoption. The updated 
R&D agenda presented herein is intended to be a step 
toward such resolution. The next section of this paper 
describes the theories, probable causes, symptoms, and inci-
dence of cybersickness associated with early and recent XR 
technology.
2.3. Cybersickness: A continuing obstacle to XR use?
While XR applications are no longer as limited by cost, 
processing speed, or available software, it is possible that 
cybersickness will limit proliferation as much as it did for 
earlier generations of XR technology (Hale & Stanney, 2014 ), 
unless effective countermeasures are implemented. How pre-
valent is cybersickness with current XR? What are the symp -
toms? What causes cybersickness and how can it be 
mitigated? The rest of this paper considers such questions 
and highlights important knowledge gaps requiring further 
study. Our intent is to formulate a broad R&D agenda to 
ensure that the initial promise of XR is realized and to ensure 
that XR is “here to stay” as a valued aspect of training, 
operational support, commerce, and entertainment. We will 
first describe the latest information concerning the incidence Table 1. XR headset sales by type.
XR headset type 2020 units sold estimate 2024 units sold estimate
AR 0.690 M 41.11 M
VR 6.37 M 35.61 M
Total 7.06 M 76.72 M
Source: IDC Worldwide Quarterly AR and VR Headset Tracker, March 18, 2020 
Figure 2. Google scholar articles per year from 1998–2019, showing AR closing 
the gap with VR.
Figure 3. Popularity of search terms “Cybersickness” (3a) and “Simulator Sickness” (3b), implying a resurgence of interest specific to Cybersickness, ca. 2015, around 
the same time interest in XR Increased (see Figure 1, and Dunn, 2017 ). (100 = peak interest, 50 = 50% peak, etc.).INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1785 
of cybersickness, which is important in determining whether 
it is still a problem.
2.4. User susceptibility to cybersickness
Cybersickness incidence estimates imply that early VR headsets 
(available ca. 1994–2010) elicited adverse symptoms among >60% 
of users during their first exposure, with 40–100% being deemed 
motion sick (depending on the criteria, systems, tasks, and expo -
sure durations across five studies reviewed), 5% quitting prema -
turely, and 5% experiencing no symptoms (Lawson, 2014 ). While 
XR systems have begun proliferating worldwide due to their 
affordability, cybersickness was still observed shortly after the 
introduction of the latest generation of VR headsets, such as the 
Oculus Rift (Serge & Moss, 2015 ). The introduction of these 
headsets addressed some of the headset-related recommendations 
from the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda by creating bright, 
low-cost head-worn displays (HWDs). Other desired headset 
features are still lacking, however, such as a wide field-of-view 
(FOV; current displays are still limited to ~100O) that supports 
task performance and presence but is free from cybersickness 
(wider FOV often increases cybersickness; Lin et al., 2002 ). Also 
needed are untethered HWD with as much processing speed as 
their tethered counterparts and further reduction in headset 
weight, as extended wear can still be physically fatiguing.
The 1998 R&D agenda also called for reduced latencies 
(but visual latency issues persist today; see Gruen et al., 
2020 ), establishment of cross-platform software with portabil -
ity (which Unity, Unreal Engine, and other development plat-
forms now support), improved tracking technology (now 
often seamlessly integrated into the VR/AR headset technol -
ogy itself), and creation of better haptic interfaces (tactile and 
force feedback is still rudimentary, but hand tracking and 
gesture recognition have been integrated into some VR/AR 
headsets). While modern multicore processors have made it 
possible to render complex auditory environments over head -
phones integrated into headsets, other senses have yet to be 
incorporated adequately (including, vestibular, chemical, or 
non-haptic somatosensory cues such as body cutaneous and 
kinesthetic stimuli). In fact, it is unlikely that the eXtended 
Reality Turing Test could be passed for any XR scenarios 
involving body locomotion or driving until natural vestibular 
and somatosensory cues are adequately simulated (Lawson & 
Riecke, 2014 ; Middleton et al., 1993 ). Based on these findings 
and considerations, recommendations from the Stanney et al. 
(1998 ) R&D agenda that should be maintained include:
●Create a wide FOV that supports task performance and 
presence but does not elicit cybersickness.
●Create powerful, lightweight, and untethered AR/VR 
HWDs.
●Reduce visual latencies.
●Create peripheral devices for senses beyond vision and 
audition.
What can we conclude about the incidence of cybersick -
ness in newer XR? While cybersickness still occurs in the 
present generation of VR headsets, there is very limited evi-
dence in the literature to enable one to discern whether the incidence of cybersickness has changed versus previous gen-
erations, and it comes from studies designed to elicit at least 
mild symptoms. An update to VR incidence estimates comes 
from a recent dissertation by Stone (2017 ), who observed that 
64/195 (32.8%) of subjects playing one of the three dynamic 
video games (for an average of 9–19 min) using an HTC 
Vive™ (a current generation VR headset) said they “somewhat 
agree” or “strongly agree” that the experience was nauseating 
(with 5.6% saying “strongly agree”). Davis et al. (2015 ) pro-
vided another incidence estimate which applies to adults 
using an Oculus Rift and stimuli consisting of two intention -
ally disturbing roller coaster scenarios. Under that level of 
challenge, at least one of the two coaster simulations caused 
12/12 participants to get mild (or worse) nausea, with 17% 
quitting in one simulation and 66% in the other.
Overall, the limited cybersickness findings with the latest 
HWDs imply that: a) Cybersickness has not been eliminated 
with the newest generation of headsets; b) As with past 
systems, incidence of cybersickness varies greatly (due to 
large differences in devices, stimuli, usage protocols, indivi -
dual physiology, and measures of sickness); c) At least one- 
third of users will experience discomfort during VR usage; d) 
AR usage may be less problematic but more research is 
needed to back this assertion; e) At least 5% of XR users are 
expected to experience severe symptoms in the latest genera -
tion headsets.
One factor that can affect cybersickness incidence is the 
ergonomics of the VR. The Oculus Rift VR headset such as 
that used by Davis et al. is not expected to fit, on average, 16% 
of females and 1% of males based on its interpupillary dis-
tance (IPD) range of adjustment, while the Oculus Quest will 
not fit 7% of females and 1% of males; so while the latest VR 
headsets are closing the IPD mismatch gap, there is still room 
for improvement. When the visual displays in a VR are not 
positioned in front of each eye properly, normal visual accom -
modation and binocular vision are challenged, leading to 
perceptual distortion, eyestrain, headache, etc. While Oculus 
is one of the most accommodating designs in terms of ergo -
nomic fit, any person without a good IPD fit could experience 
greater cybersickness (Stanney et al., 2020 ), and a poor fit is 
more common among people of smaller average stature, such 
as women. Could this be the reason that some past studies 
have claimed that women are more susceptible to cybersick -
ness than men? Stanney et al. (2020 ) noted that another 
popular VR, the HTC Vive VR headset, is not expected to 
fit, on average, ~35% of females and ~16% of males based on 
its adjustable IPD range. This IPD fit/no-fit variable, when 
incorporated into a predictive model of cybersickness, was 
found to be the primary driver of cybersickness recovery 
time, with a secondary driver being motion sickness history 
(Stanney et al., 2020 ). Women have been reported to be more 
susceptible to motion sickness in only 50% of the studies in 
the literature (Lawson, 2014 ), with women being reported 
more susceptible far less often in controlled laboratory studies 
(versus surveys). Stanney et al. concluded that it could be the 
ergonomics of the technology and not sex differences that 
drive cybersickness up in females using certain types of VR. 
Many other confounding factors contribute to observed sex 
differences in motion sickness (Lawson, 2014 ), some of which, 1786
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
like IPD, imply that not all users are experiencing the same 
stimulus. Thus, presently, it cannot be said definitively that 
women have been proven to be more susceptible to motion 
sickness, nor that, when differences are observed, they are due 
to sex, per se.
Based on the findings in this section, important considera -
tions in the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda that should be 
maintained in the current recommendations include:
●Determine the various drivers of cybersickness and cre-
ate a predictive model.
●Establish means of determining user susceptibility to 
cybersickness and aftereffects.
●Establish countermeasures to aftereffects.
●Identify factors that contribute to how provocative XR 
content is, and determine their relative weightings.
There is a general belief that AR HWDs will not have the 
same level of physiological adverse impact on users compared 
to VR; however, there are limited data to back this assertion. 
The evidence available comes from Vovk, Wild, Guest, and 
Kuula (2018 ), who claimed AR engenders negligible cyber -
sickness, yet they excluded a relatively large number (>15%) 
of outliers in their data. Hughes et al. (2020 ) found 
a Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) symptom profile 
of Oculomotor > Disorientation > Nausea (O > D > N) in 
a current generation immersive AR headset (Microsoft 
HoloLens 1), with an average Total sickness SSQ score of 
23.69 (S.D. = 21.73) immediately following 3–40 min expo -
sures with 30 min breaks between sessions, which puts AR 
firmly in the “Medium” intensity range (75th percentile) 
based on VR system SSQ percentiles (Stanney et al., 2014 ). 
With VR systems, a Total SSQ > 20.1 is generally associated 
with adverse physiological effects (e.g., ataxia, degraded hand- 
eye coordination, VOR shifts) and dropouts (users quitting). 
As an augmentation to symptom measures such as the SSQ, 
physiological measures of adverse aftereffects should be 
explored with long-duration AR exposure, to determine if 
there is a similar adverse physiological impact and whether 
this is associated with dropouts. Finally, usage protocols 
should be explored further, such as in Hughes et al. (2020 ), 
who found that when a usage protocol of 6–20 min AR 
sessions with 30 min breaks between sessions was employed, 
the average Total SSQ score dropped to 15.71 (S.D. = 10.4) 
immediately post-exposure, which is approaching the “Low” 
range (25th percentile; Stanney et al., 2014 ). Based on these 
findings, important considerations that were part of the 
Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda that should be maintained 
include:
●Standardize subjective and objective measurement of 
aftereffects. If possible, on-line measurement approaches 
should be established that are integrated into XR systems.
●Establish product acceptance criteria and systems 
administration protocols to ensure that cybersickness 
and aftereffects are minimized.2.5. Etiological hypotheses
The Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda identified the need to 
develop a better theoretical understanding of cybersickness 
in terms of sensory discordance and human adaptation time -
lines. This has yet to be fully achieved. While the facts for 
which a complete motion sickness theory must account have 
been stipulated (Lawson, 2014 ), there are many knowledge 
gaps concerning causes of cybersickness and no definitive, 
universally accepted theory. For this reason, the term 
“hypothesis” was used throughout this paper to refer to the 
competing schools-of-thought on cybersickness, with a focus 
on identifying practical recommendations that can be 
derived from each one. Specifically, three widely known 
hypotheses and one new one are introduced briefly, below, 
with an emphasis on their contributions to the updated R&D 
agenda and implications for cybersickness mitigation 
expounded. However, the reader should be aware of other 
important hypotheses concerning motion sickness, which 
have emphasized the role of eye movements, rest frames, 
perceived vertical, and ontological development of motor 
control – a critical review of more than ten motion sickness 
hypotheses (or variants of hypotheses) is provided by 
Keshavarz et al. (2014 ). Four examples of hypotheses are 
provided below.
Sensory conflict hypothesis . The sensory conflict (or neural 
mismatch) hypothesis of motion sickness, which is the most 
widely cited, postulates that motion sickness is due to sensory 
conflicts between expected patterns of afferent/reafferent sig-
nals from visual, auditory, tactile, kinesthetic, and vestibular 
activity established through previous experiences and what is 
being experienced in a novel environment (Oman, 1998 ; 
Reason & Brand, 1975 ). For example, there can be 
a mismatch between what the proprioceptive (tactile, kines -
thetic, vestibular) senses indicate is happening in the real 
world (e.g., sitting still in a chair while wearing a VR headset), 
versus what the visual and auditory senses are indicating in 
the virtual world (e.g., accelerating through a virtual environ -
ment), which causes a perceptual conflict that is often sick-
ness-inducing. The visual contributors to this mismatch are 
not as profound in AR because AR typically allows for view -
ing of real-world rest frames, such as walls, floors, etc., which 
is one reason AR systems tend to elicit less overt nausea than 
VR systems. Potential limitations of the sensory conflict 
hypothesis are described in the Ecological Hypothesis section 
of this paper and in detail in Keshavarz and Hecht (2014 ).
Evolutionary hypothesis . The evolutionary (or poison) 
hypothesis is an expansion of the sensory conflict hypothesis, 
which seeks to explain the origins of the most cardinal symp -
toms of the motion sickness response (viz., nausea and vomit -
ing) (Money, 1990 ; Treisman, 1977 ). This is a hypothesis 
concerning the origin of motion sickness rather than the 
specific aspects of a stimulus immediately causing motion 
sickness. The hypothesis is that nausea and vomiting due to 
sensory cue conflicts are an indirect by-product of an ancient 
evolutionary adaptation poison defense system that is being 
accidentally triggered by modern challenging situations of real 
or apparent motion (the latter of which is prevalent in XR INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1787 
systems). The brain has evolved in such a way that it mistakes 
modern real/apparent motion stimuli causing disorganization 
to typical patterns of vestibular, visual, and somatosensory 
information as instead representing a natural toxin-related 
malfunction in the central nervous system (CNS), which initi-
ates an emetic response as a defense mechanism.
Oman (2012 ) has pondered whether the evolutionary 
hypothesis is an overly “adaptationist” explanation for cyber -
sickness, as it assumes “that evolution has shaped all pheno -
typic traits for survival advantage” (Oman, 2012 , p. 117). The 
key assumptions of the evolutionary hypothesis were recently 
challenged by Lawson (2014 ) who argued (in the direct evolu -
tionary hypothesis ) that there are plausible means by which 
ancient forms of real or apparent motion could have contrib -
uted directly to the evolution of aversive reactions (without 
the need for a co-opted poison response). Extending this idea, 
Lawson offered a modification of Triesman’s poison hypoth -
esis (the direct poison hypothesis) , which argues that the evo-
lutionary circumstances that caused the ingestion of toxins or 
intoxicants were the same circumstances in which unusual, 
maladaptive motions of ancient origin frequently were pre-
sent. Therefore, the human motion sickness response did not 
have to evolve accidentally by generalizing a poison response 
to modern motions, but could have evolved directly, because 
the ancient circumstances under which our primate ancestors 
could become poisoned (or intoxicated) also were circum -
stances which harmed their evolutionary fitness directly dur-
ing natural conditions of real-body motion and/or visual-field 
motion.
Ecological hypothesis . Under the ecological hypothesis 
(also known as the postural instability hypothesis ), motion 
sickness is postulated to be caused by alterations of pos-
tural control (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1991 ). This hypothesis 
suggests that a primary behavioral goal of humans is to 
maintain postural stability, and thus as postural instability 
increases, motion sickness develops. Postural instability is 
suggested to occur in novel environments in which “we fail 
to perceive the new dynamics or … are unable to … 
execute the control actions that are appropriate for the 
new dynamics” (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1991 , p. 204); it lasts 
until the individual can adapt to the novel motion cues. As 
with sensory conflict hypothesis, potential limitations of 
the ecological hypothesis or related findings have been 
raised (Bos, 2011 ; Golding & Gresty, 2005 ; Keshavarz 
et al., 2014 ; Lackner, 2014 ; Lubeck et al., 2015 ; Pettijohn 
et al., 2018 ).
Multisensory re-weighting hypothesis . Another expansion of 
the sensory conflict hypothesis is the multisensory reweighting 
hypothesis , which suggests that susceptibility to cybersickness 
may be associated with an individual’s ability to rapidly 
reweight (Oman, 1990 ) conflicting multisensory cues in XR 
environments, such as visual-vestibular mismatches 
(Gallagher & Ferrè, 2018 ). Whereas in the real world, vestib -
ular cues are highly weighted, due to their lack of validity in 
immersive environments, vestibular cues must be down- 
weighted to resolve sensory conflicts, which are most pro-
nounced in fully immersive VR headsets. Those who can 
rapidly adapt to these conflicts, for example, by upregulating 
visual cues relative to conflicting vestibular cues that do not contribute to useful estimates of the physical body while 
immersed in the virtual world, will experience a mild form 
of inoculation to cybersickness with repeat exposure to XR. 
Thus, individual multisensory reweighting speed may factor 
into the degree to which an individual experiences 
cybersickness.
Each one of these hypotheses, and their contributions to 
the updated R&D agenda, will now be discussed in more 
detail. The reader will note that there is a diverse range of 
opinions and approaches among the named section authors 
discussing this dynamic field of inquiry.
3.Sensory cue conflict and cybersickness (Fulvio and 
Rokers)
The sensory conflict hypothesis of motion sickness attributes 
cybersickness to conflicts between expected sensory cues 
established through previous experiences and those currently 
being experienced in a novel environment (Oman, 1998 ; 
Reason & Brand, 1975 ). In particular, conflicts between ves-
tibular and visual motion cues, prominent in VR systems, 
appear to be particularly troublesome. It is known that indi-
viduals vary in their sensitivity to such sensory cues. 
Specifically, individuals show considerable variability in 
cybersickness propensity and severity – some individuals can 
tolerate only very brief exposure to XR (minutes or less), 
whereas others seem limitless in their tolerance (hours). This 
range of cybersickness susceptibility suggests that there are 
other characteristics that also vary among individuals and 
relate to cybersickness. Their identification can make it easier 
to predict in advance who will be likely to experience dis-
comfort when using XR, and, more importantly, to develop 
solutions that mitigate the effects. We thus tested the a priori 
prediction that individuals with greater sensitivity to sensory 
cues will be more likely to detect sensory conflicts when 
placed in XR environments, and will therefore be more sus-
ceptible to cybersickness. As such, individual differences in 
cue sensitivity should predict differences in cybersickness 
susceptibility.
A large sample of undergraduate students (n = 95; 59 
females), most of whom had little to no experience with VR 
devices, completed a two-part study in which they were first 
measured for their sensitivity to different sensory cues to 
motion-in-depth presented in a VR HWD, and then sepa -
rately measured for their propensity for cybersickness while 
viewing video content in the same VR display. Finally, the 
relationship between the two measures for the different sen-
sory cues was quantified in order to (i) test the prediction that 
greater sensitivity to sensory cues is associated with more 
severe cybersickness; and to (ii) determine which sensory 
cues in particular are sickness-inducing.
Sensitivity to sensory cues was measured using a dot 
motion direction discrimination task viewed in a VR HWD 
(see Figure 4a). Sensitivity to 3D motion defined by four sets 
of sensory cues was tested (see Figure 4b). One type of 3D 
motion was defined by binocular cues only. This Binocular 
motion was presented as a cloud of dots to both eyes such that 
when viewed in the VR display, a single cloud of dots 
appeared to be moving toward or away from the participant 1788
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
on each trial, within the context of a larger virtual room. 
Importantly, monocular information (dot size and density 
changes) was removed from this stimulus. A second type of 
3D motion was defined by monocular cues only. This 
Monocular motion was presented as a cloud of dots to only 
one eye within the same virtual room on each trial, with the 
other eye viewing only the virtual room. Thus, binocular 
information was removed so that the motion direction of 
the dots (toward or away) was defined by the dot size and 
density changes in the single eye’s view. A third type of 3D 
motion included both binocular and monocular cues – 
Combined Cue Motion – thus presenting the motion with 
dot size and density changes to both eyes within the virtual 
room. Finally, the fourth type of 3D motion included bino -
cular, monocular, and motion parallax cues due to head- 
motion contingent updating of the VR display – Full VR 
Motion. The motion was presented in the same way as the 
combined cues motion, but the viewpoint of the scene chan -
ged according to participants’ head movements.
The four types of dot motion were presented in blocks and 
the order of the blocks was random and counterbalanced 
across participants. Within a block, the dots had different 
coherence levels, such that lower coherence values made dis-
crimination of dot motion direction more difficult. Individual 
sensitivity to the individual sensory cue conditions was 
defined as the slope of the psychometric curve fit to 
a participant’s data across all motion coherence values – larger 
slopes implied greater sensitivity (see Figure 4c). As expected, 
large variability in sensitivity was found across participants for 
any given sensory cue condition, as well as variability across sensory cue conditions (see Figure 4d). Not surprisingly, 
sensitivity was greater when more cues to 3D motion were 
available (i.e., compare “Combined cues” and “Full VR” to 
“Binocular” and “Monocular”).
The critical question, however, is whether these differences 
in sensitivity relate to and predict differences in cybersickness. 
Cybersickness propensity was measured in a separate task in 
which the same participants viewed up to 22.5 min of bino -
cular, head-fixed video content that increased in intensity. 
The video content included footage of a first-person car 
ride, computer-generated video footage of a first-person 
fighter jet flight through a canyon, footage of a first-person 
drone flight through a parking lot, and footage of a first- 
person drone flight around a bridge. Participants had the 
option of quitting if viewing became intolerable. Both prior 
to and after viewing the videos, participants completed the 16- 
item SSQ (Kennedy et al., 1993 ). Cybersickness propensity/ 
severity was quantified by the difference in the total sickness 
score between post- and pre-video viewing.
The video footage was intended to be sickness-inducing to 
allow for a range of sickness across individuals. Indeed, the 
video footage led to significant sickness on average compared 
to baseline, but across individuals, there was considerable 
variability in severity (see Figure 5a). Critically, when indivi -
dual sensitivity in each of the four sensory cue conditions was 
related to the change in cybersickness due to video-viewing, 
trends were uncovered of the expected relationship whereby 
larger sensitivity was associated with greater sickness in all 
conditions, but only in the Full VR sensory cue condition was 
the relationship significant after correcting for multiple 
Figure 4. Assessing the sensitivity to motion in depth under different cue conditions* (Adapted from Fulvio, Ji, & Rokers, 2020 ). * a) Observers viewed random dot 
motion stimuli in an Oculus DK2 head-mounted display (HMD). The stimuli simulated dots that moved toward or away from the observer through a cylindrical 
volume. The proportion of signal dots (coherence), which moved coherently either toward or away, and noise dots, which moved randomly through the volume, was 
varied in a random, counterbalanced order across trials. Observers reported the perceived motion direction. Stimuli were presented in a virtual environment that 
consisted of a room (the insert depicts a “zoomed out” view) with a 1/f noise-patterned plane located 1.2 m from the observer. b) Dot motion was defined by one of 
four sets of sensory cues, presented in a randomized blocked order. Binocular dot motion contained binocular cues to depth (i.e., changing disparity, inter-ocular 
velocity), but lacked monocular cues to depth (i.e., dot density and size changes). Monocular dot motion contained monocular cues to depth but lacked binocular 
cues. Combined cues dot motion contained both binocular and monocular cues. Full VR dot motion contained binocular and monocular cues and motion parallax 
cues associated with head-motion contingent updating of the display. c) Psychometric functions were fit to the percentage of “toward” responses at each motion 
coherence level to obtain the slope (σ) of the fit for each observer in each cueing condition. Sensitivity in each cueing condition was defined as the inverse of the 
slope, with larger values indicating greater sensitivity. d) Histograms of the distribution of sensitivities across observers in each of the four cueing conditions reveal 
considerable variability both within and across conditions. Sensitivity tends to be greater in combined cue conditions compared to when cues are presented in 
isolation.INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1789 
comparisons (see Figure 5b). It is noted that the Full VR 
sensory cue set is the only one of the four that includes 
motion parallax. Moreover, the video footage was head- 
fixed – it did not update according to the participants’ head 
movements – and therefore lacked motion parallax cues. 
Further, head movements made during the video viewing 
created conflicts with movements implied by the footage itself.
Taken together, the specificity of the relationship 
between sensitivity to the Full VR condition and cybersick -
ness and the potential for motion parallax-related conflict 
during video viewing implicate sensitivity to motion paral -
lax cues as an important predictor of cybersickness . As 
predicted, those individuals who had greater sensitivity to 
motion parallax information experienced greater discomfort 
when that information was absent or in conflict. Future 
work can test other XR applications to determine how 
sensitivity to different cues may impact cybersickness 
under various scenarios. For those sensitive to cue conflicts, 
design techniques can be employed to attempt to minimize 
sensory conflicts and thus reduce cybersickness, such as 
teleportation, concordant motion, alignment of head/body 
with virtual motion, speed modification, and provision of 
visual cues that match or minimize vestibular cues 
(Bowman et al., 1998 ; Carnegie & Rhee, 2015 ; Dennison 
& D’Zmura, 2017 ; Fernandes & Feiner, 2016 ; Keshavarz, 
Hecht, & Lawson, 2014 ; Kuiper et al., 2019 ; Prothero & 
Parker, 2003 ; Wada et al., 2012 ).
Based on this review, an important consideration that was 
part of the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda that should be 
maintained includes:●Establish XR content design guidelines that assist in 
mitigating cybersickness.
In addition, important considerations to add to the updated 
R&D agenda include:
●Determine feasibility of testing an individual’s sensitivity 
to sensory depth cues and determine if such sensitivity is 
associated with more severe cybersickness.
●Determine which sensory cues, beyond motion parallax, 
are sickness-inducing.
In conclusion, the primary outcome of this sensory con-
flict-based research may seem problematic for XR – those 
who would derive the best experiences from XR would also 
be those who could tolerate the experience the least. However, 
the results suggest possible solutions. Ideas for cybersickness 
mitigation are summarized in Table 2, based upon the impli -
cations from a variety of theoretical approaches to the pro-
blem, which are described in this paper, including sensory/cue 
conflict (this Section 3), the evolutionary hypothesis (the next 
Section 4), the ecological hypothesis (Section 5), and the 
multisensory re-weighting hypothesis (Section 6). We turn 
next to the implications of the evolutionary approach.
4.Evolutionary hypothesis: Implications of human- 
system adaptation to cybersickness (Fidopiastis and 
Stanney)
The evolutionary hypothesis implies that the brain recognizes 
certain sensorimotor conflicts as toxins that must be expelled. 
Such conflicts may occur during integration of vergence- 
accommodation, visual-vestibular, or visual-vestibulo- 
somatosensory (tactile/kinesthetic) information while using 
XR headsets. Specifically, donning an HWD in an XR envir -
onment with limited FOV, optical distortions, static projec -
tion depth planes, and certain types of sustained active 
motions are expected to present conflicts that elicit cybersick -
ness with associated maladaptation in visual, vestibular, or 
psychomotor systems (e.g., changes in accommodation, ver-
gence, vestibulo-ocular reflex [VOR], ataxia, or maladroit 
hand-eye coordination). Since “the evolutionary function of 
the human brain is to process information in ways that lead to 
adaptive behavior” (Cosmides & Tooby, 1987 , p. 282), and 
maladaptive behaviors associated with XR exposure could be 
harmful, XR systems should be designed such that human 
sensorineural mechanisms associated with discordance are 
minimized; otherwise cybersickness and associated potentially 
harmful maladaptation may manifest.
When an XR experience sufficiently perturbs perceptual 
cues within virtual or augmented operational environments 
that define the nature of the world and indicate how to per-
form actions, cybersickness will occur (Kruijff et al., 2010 ; 
Welch & Mohler, 2014 ). Thus, cybersickness is not predicted 
as a result of all intersensory conflict conditions. Furthermore, 
those individuals who can quickly adapt their sensorimotor 
responses to XR environments may avoid sickness altogether 
Figure 5. Sensory cue sensitivity predicts cybersickness severity* (Adapted from 
Fulvio, Ji, & Rokers, 2020 ). * a) After viewing binocular, head-fixed video content 
in the VR HMD, observers reported significantly greater levels of cybersickness 
compared to baseline reports obtained at the beginning of the study. However, 
sickness-inducing effects of the video content were highly-variable among 
observers, with some individuals appearing to be relatively immune to cyber -
sickness. b) Change in motion sickness as a function of sensory cue sensitivity. 
Observers’ sensitivity to the Full VR dot motion predicted their susceptibility to 
cybersickness with video viewing. The relationship was not significant in the 
other cue conditions. This suggests that sensitivity to motion parallax cues in 
particular is an important factor susceptibility to cybersickness.1790
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
(McCauley & Sharkey, 1992 ). Characterizing sensory conflicts 
that lead to cybersickness is complex given the myriad of ways 
that XR technology, coupled with computer graphics techni -
ques, negatively impact human intersensory and sensorimotor 
integration. XR technology thus redefines human perception 
of the natural world and perturbs multimodal cues that assist 
with visuomotor coordination (Welch & Mohler, 2014 ). 
Nonetheless, human perceptual and sensorimotor systems 
are dynamic and allow humans to adapt to such diverse 
rearrangements of spatial information (Welch, 1986 ).
Adaptation as a process can be quick, as in visual coding 
(Webster, 2015 ), or more gradual, as in the outcome or end 
state of the adaptation (Welch, 1978 ). Most research evaluat -
ing effects of adaptation associated with XR exposure are end- 
state results that quantify prolonged changes (i.e., aftereffects) 
in perception or shifts in perceptual motor coordination that 
reduce or eliminate inter-sensory conflicts (Stanney & 
Kennedy, 1998 ; Stanney et al., 1999 ). Yet, reducing the adap -
tation process to only a hierarchical sensory loop may be why 
there are conflicting theories as to how best to use adaptation 
as a mitigation for cybersickness.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of persons 
experiencing adaptation when wearing prism glasses provides 
information on how the brain changes in response to inter -
sensory conflicts induced by visuomotor discrepancies 
(Sekiyama et al., 2000 ). Psychophysical results accompanying such fMRI research demonstrate the time course and localiza -
tion error reduction of sensor-motor adaptation that one can 
expect to experience in XR environments; such adaptation is 
typically associated with a loss in cue sensitivity when exposed 
to a perturbing sensory conflict (Webster, 2015 ). The fMRI 
results further suggest a potential for broader change in 
visuomotor function that includes coding new brain repre -
sentations such as body schemas as an outcome of a positive 
or more functional adaptation process. As aforemen -
tioned, these and other psychophysical data suggest that 
visuomotor adaptation to XR stimuli can occur within min-
utes of XR exposure (M. S. Dennison et al., 2016 ; Moss & 
Muth, 2011 ) or over longer periods of time as changes register 
beyond the retina to higher perceptual areas (Kitazaki, 2013 ). 
Overtime, such adaptation is expected to mitigate cybersick -
ness. To better understand the role of adaptation as 
a mitigation for cybersickness, a human-centered approach 
is needed where symbiosis between human and technology is 
achieved (Fidopiastis et al., 2010 ).
Adaptation can be considered a multichannel process, as it 
relies on complex neural processing in multiple interacting 
networks of both motor and sensory systems (i.e., receptors, 
such as retina or limb). Thus, adaptation effects are not 
localized to the level of the sensor alone (Webster, 2015 ), 
but are rather manifest at the brain level in action networks, 
such as those used to direct hand-eye coordination or postural Table 2. Potential cybersickness mitigation strategies implied by different etiological hypothesis.
Underlying 
hypothesis 
(and section 
discussed)Cybersickness mitigations
Sensory cue conflict 
(Sects. 2.5, 3)●Upon initial XR exposure, minimize or eliminate motion parallax cues so users can acclimate to the XR experience.
●Gradually step-up motion parallax cues over time.
●If a user begins to feel discomfort, diminish the motion parallax cues once again.
●Include options to minimize the amount of head movement/motion parallax required.
●Use teleportation (but note that this can increase disorientation and hinder spatial awareness).
●Add concordant motion (e.g., a motion-base to reduce visual-vestibular conflicts).
●Ask observers to actively align their head/body to the behavior of the virtual motion they are experiencing.
●Limit or slow forward speed and acceleration to reduce visual scene motion.
●When conflicts persist:
○Provide visual cues that match the vestibular system, such as by adding inertially stable visual motion cues (e.g., a fixed-horizon).
○Minimize vestibular cues through depth-of-field blur, peripheral blur, or dynamic field of view, the latter of which involves modifying 
FOV based on speed and angular velocity.
Evolutionary 
(2.5, 4)●Foster sensory adaptation via perceptual recalibration by highlighting visuomotor discordances in order to engender a sense of body 
ownership and drive sensorimotor adaptation in XR environments.
●Foster sensory adaptation via visual-motor skill alterations by using representational feedback that appears to arise from manipulation 
of the XR environment.
Ecological 
(2.5, 5)●XR should be used while seated, and users should be encouraged to use a headrest.
●Design XR dynamics that support rather than degrade postural stability.
●Use motion sensor data (from headsets) to identify individuals at risk for cybersickness.
●Modulate XR dynamics in real time to suppress unstable postural activity.
Multisensory 
reweighting 
(2.5, 6)●Promoting rapid re-weighting of multisensory cues may protect against the provocative conditions of XR exposure.
●Methods of facilitating vection might offer protection from cybersickness in XR.
●“Re-couple” multimodal cues, either by physically moving an observer along with visual self-motion or by stimulating the vestibular 
sense with mild current (galvanic vestibular stimulation, GVS) to replicate missing acceleration cues.
●Use of vestibular noise can modulate the cybersickness response.
●Expose users to tonic noisy GVS over a long duration (30 min continuous) to reduce cybersickness.
●Consider using tDCS to reduce the severity of cybersickness.
●Increase presence to lower cybersickness.
●Use positive smells and pleasant-sounding music to promote user comfort.INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1791 
stability. For example, a viewer is presented with a virtual 
visual object in an XR display, which will be coarser in 
appearance than in the real world because pixels will be 
magnified in the display. This visual object will thus appear 
different than in the real world because of the magnification 
and smaller display FOV. Further, the fixed single image 
plane of the display will affect vergence-accommodation of 
the eye, thus leading to unnatural blurring of the virtual object 
within the visual field. As a result, when a viewer attempts to 
invoke natural hand-eye coordinated activities with the virtual 
object, the body will need to adapt to the offset world dis-
played in the headset. All of these offsets (i.e., pixel magnifi -
cation, vergence-accommodation mismatches, unnatural 
viewing), not only affect the retina of the eye but also the 
brain networks necessary for directed behavior in the real 
world. The human visual system is thus constantly adapting 
and responding to many XR induced consistent and incon -
sistent visual perceptual changes simultaneous to the obser -
ver’s interaction within XR environments. These perceptual 
changes are occurring quickly and along multiple perception 
channels, such as visual, auditory, and tactile/kinesthetic. 
Thus, adaptation “process” outcomes are complex, integrated, 
and brain-based. These effects may also interact with end- 
state adaptations, such as hand-eye coordination and postural 
stability. It is important to consider integration of eye tracking 
into HWDs to effectively capture such adaptive changes in eye 
point positioning and adjust visual content to support these 
adaptive changes, such as by presenting virtual objects at the 
appropriate depth and resolution to support human perfor -
mance (Fidopiastis  et al., 2003 ; Fidopiastis, 2006 ). This is not 
a simple challenge. Current XR designers and developers must 
be careful not to oversimplify the problem space of human 
adaptation. Thus, while adaptation is a potential mediator to 
cybersickness, given the multichannel nature of adaptation, 
the specific training methods, or exposure protocols required 
to drive adaptation within XR are not entirely established for 
all aspects of the user’s response (Dużmańska et al., 2018 ). An 
opportunity exists to discern a collection of adaptation 
schemes such that the effects and duration of cybersickness 
and negative sensory-motor reorganization are lessened 
across a wide variety of XR solutions (c.f. Kennedy et al., 
2000 ).
Welch and Sampanes (2008 ) suggested that two types of 
adaptation, perceptual recalibration (i.e., an automatic, 
restricted process of perceptual learning) and visual-motor 
skill alterations (i.e., learning hand and eye-coordinated 
movements through a cognitive problem-solving process) 
are distinguishable based upon characteristics and conditions 
that constitute the XR experience. Visual perceptual recalibra -
tion occurs when one sensory system (e.g., vision) calibrates 
another (e.g., touch). This type of perceptual learning is 
expected to contribute greatly to negative aftereffects, whereas 
visual motor skill acquisition occurring during problem- 
solving tasks that are spatially complex and require more 
voluntary movement may not contribute as much to negative 
aftereffects (Clower & Boussaoud, 2000 ).
In terms of perceptual recalibration, adaptation has con-
scious and unconscious components that lend to one’s per-
ception and representation of self or body schema as an actor in XR environments (Rossetti et al., 2005 ). Body schema 
(unconscious, interactor with the environment) and body 
image (partially conscious, personal self) are understood to 
be integrally connected via dynamic interactions instead of 
hierarchical linkages, which together drive body ownership 
(Gallagher, 2005 ). In healthy persons, embodied object (inan -
imate, animate, human) “representations” or cognitive assess -
ments assist in determining perception and action with 
reference to one’s own body (Reed et al., 2004 ). Alteration 
in perception of such body schema is apparent, for example, 
in prism studies where a new representation of visuomotor 
mapping of the hands emerges during adaptation to reversal 
of the visual field (Sekiyama et al., 2000 ). An embodied 
cognition XR design approach (Weser & Proffitt, 2019 ) may 
thus better assist with facilitating multiple levels of human 
system adaptation responses and allow for a more symbiotic 
integration with XR technologies (see Table 2).
●One class of XR adaptation schemes could be targeted at 
perceptual recalibration and involve highlighting visuo -
motor discordances in order to engender a sense of body 
ownership and drive sensorimotor adaptation in XR 
environments (i.e., when visuomotor discrepancies 
occur, feedback could be provided that is coincident 
with the limb indicating an internal error, thereby 
engendering perceptual recalibration). While such reca-
libration is expected to lead to adverse aftereffects, when 
sense of embodiment is critical to skill acquisition this 
approach may be appropriate.
In terms of visual-motor skill alterations, research using 
re-adaptation strategies, such as eye-to-hand coordination 
activities post-exposure, suggests that during XR exposure 
participants undergo visual-motor adaptations that do not 
quickly return to baseline skill levels even after short expo -
sure durations (c.f. Champney et al., 2007 ). Given that much 
of the past visual-motor skill alterations related research 
utilized VR systems (c.f. Bagce et al., 2011 ), one might 
conclude that maladaptation issues are pervasive only within 
fully immersive XR displays. This conclusion is unsupported, 
as AR video and projection HWDs also show evidence of 
negative hand-eye coordination aftereffects (Biocca & 
Rolland, 1998 ). For example, Condino et al. (2020 ) demon -
strated that persons performing a precision connect-the-dot 
task in AR were off by an average 5.9 mm but could not tell 
that they were making such gross hand-eye coordination 
errors. These results suggest that visual-motor skill altera -
tions also change body perception and attribution of move -
ment agency. Design strategies may need to account for body 
perception to allow for a more cooperative adaptation pro-
cess (see Table 2).
●A second class of XR adaptation schemes could be targeted 
at visual-motor skill alterations and involve using repre -
sentational feedback that appears to arise from manipula -
tion of the XR environment (i.e., not perceived to be 
physically coincident with the limb and thus registered as 
an external error), leading to an indirect mapping strategy 
that allows for context-specific adjustments of motor 1792
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
responses within the XR environment but minimal adverse 
aftereffects. When embodiment is not critical to skill acqui -
sition, such as in more cognitive, problem-solving tasks, 
this type of adaptation scheme may be appropriate.
A human-centered design cycle that includes these and 
other types of adaptation schemes may help mitigate cyber -
sickness in XR systems. The effectiveness of such adaptation 
may, however, be XR technology and task dependent and may 
be confounded by exposure duration (Dużmańska et al., 
2018 ). Tasks and types of feedback make a difference in 
adaptation outcomes when the XR environment requires real- 
world actions. Thus, adaptation effects may scale to body 
schema representations in the brain and only become facil-
itatory once a new brain representation is defined. Providing 
a more encompassing perspective of adaptation may guide 
research and facilitate a better understanding of mechanisms 
of cybersickness. Based on this review, important considera -
tions to add to the updated R&D agenda include:
●Establish human adaptation schemes in XR applications.
●Integrate eye-tracking into XR devices.
●Determine specific training methods or exposure proto -
cols required to drive sensory adaptation within XR 
systems; such as by examining:
○The feasibility of fostering perceptual recalibration to 
engender a sense of body ownership and drive sen-
sorimotor adaptation.
○The feasibility of fostering visual-motor skill altera -
tions that lead to an indirect mapping strategy that 
allows for context-specific adjustments of motor 
responses.
In conclusion, the review in this section suggests that, 
while the sensory conflict hypothesis implies that individuals 
may be sensitive to sensory cues and this sensitivity may lead 
to cybersickness, it may be feasible to mitigate this sensitivity 
by fostering sensory adaptation. Related implications for 
cybersickness mitigation based on the evolutionary hypothesis 
have been summarized in Table 2.
5.Ecological hypothesis: Postural instability and 
cybersickness (Stoffregen)
Sensory conflict is hypothesized to arise from discrepancies 
between the current pattern of multisensory input and the 
pattern expected on the basis of past interactions with the 
environment (Oman, 1982 ; Reason, 1978 ). The hypothesis 
proposes an antagonistic process in which some inputs are 
suppressed in favor of others, and in which adaptation con-
sists of changes in weights (e.g., Gallagher & Ferrè, 2018 ; 
Weech, Varghese, & Barnett-Cowan, 2018 ). Variants of sen-
sory conflict hypothesis have been proposed, such as 
Treisman’s (1977 ) poison hypothesis, which argues that per-
ception requires sense-specific spatial reference systems, and 
that ingested toxins produce “mismatches between the sys-
tems” (p. 494). Thus, ingested toxins are seen simply as being 
a source of sensory conflict.In the “rest frame” hypothesis (Prothero & Parker, 2003 ), 
hypothetical rest frames are accessed via multisensory stimu -
lation; a “visual rest frame,” and “inertial rest frame,” and so 
on. Hence, conflict between hypothetical rest frames entails 
sensory conflict. Finally, Ebenholtz et al. (1994 , p. 1034), 
acknowledged that their “eye movement hypothesis” was clo-
sely aligned with sensory conflict hypothesis.
Stoffregen and Riccio (1991 ), argued that the interpretation 
of any pattern of multisensory input as “conflict” requires 
comparison with some other pattern that is defined as “non- 
conflict.” Patterns of light, sound, and so on carry no intrinsic 
metric for “equality” (contra Howard, 1982 ). Accordingly, the 
definition, or standard, for non-conflict must be internal (e.g., 
Oman, 1982 ). Comparison of current multisensory patterns 
against internal expectations is problematic because the scien -
tist cannot know a person’s history of interactions with the 
environment and, therefore, cannot know (in quantitative 
detail) what pattern of multisensory stimulation is expected. 
Thus, while we may quantify patterns of sensory stimulation, 
we cannot compute a quantitative estimate of conflict between 
current and expected inputs. It follows that sensory conflict 
hypothesis is not subject to empirical test: It cannot be falsi-
fied (Ebenholtz et al., 1994 ; Lackner & Graybiel, 1981 ; 
Stoffregen & Riccio, 1991 ).
Sensory conflict hypothesis has struggled to explain com -
mon motion sickness phenomena. For example, several stu-
dies find that motion sickness is more common among 
women than among men. Attempts to account for this effect 
(for a review, see Koslucher et al., 2016 ) have been ad hoc: 
they have not claimed there are sex-specific levels of sensory 
conflict. Women and men have similar types of perceptual- 
motor interactions with the world. Given this elementary fact, 
why should sensory conflict differ between the genders?
Consider also the common observation that passengers are 
more likely to experience motion sickness than drivers (e.g., 
Oman, 1982 ; Reason, 1978 ). In a yoked control study, Rolnick 
and Lubow (1991 ) found that passengers were more likely 
than drivers to become sick. As the authors noted, “there is 
no reason to assume that this conflict was absent or reduced 
in subjects who had control, as compared to no-control sub-
jects” (p. 877). Stoffregen, Chang et al. (2017 ) asked middle- 
aged adults to drive a virtual automobile. Some participants 
had decades of experience driving physical vehicles, while 
others had never driven any motor vehicle. If real driving 
experience gives rise to particular expectations for multisen -
sory stimulation which match simulated driving, then motion 
sickness should have differed between drivers and non- 
drivers, but the incidence of motion sickness was not 
observed to differ between drivers and non-drivers. The fact 
that sensory conflict hypothesis cannot explain either sex 
differences or the driver-passenger effect, both of which 
have been reported in the literature, calls for consideration 
of alternative theories.
Riccio and Stoffregen (1991 , p. 205) hypothesized that, “ … 
prolonged postural instability is the cause of motion sickness 
symptoms. That is to say, we believe that postural instability 
precedes the symptoms of motion sickness, and that it is 
necessary to produce symptoms.” Riccio and Stoffregen 
acknowledged that “inputs” from different perceptual systems INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1793 
often differ, but they pointed out that these differences need 
not be interpreted in terms of conflict. They proposed that 
multisensory non-identities constitute higher-order informa -
tion about animal-environment interaction, and that the 
senses work cooperatively (rather than antagonistically) to 
detect this higher-order information. This proposal has rele-
vance for motion sickness, but also in terms of general the-
ories of perception (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1988 ; Stoffregen & 
Bardy, 2001 ; Stoffregen, Mantel et al., 2017 ; Stoffregen & 
Riccio, 1988 ). The postural instability hypothesis is incompa -
tible with sensory conflict hypothesis in terms of broader 
concepts of information processing upon which the sensory 
conflict hypothesis is based (e.g., Chemero, 2011 ; Gibson, 
1966 ; 1979 ; Pascual-Leone et al., 2005 ). The postural instabil -
ity hypothesis shifts the focus in motion sickness research 
away from perceptual inputs and information processing 
and toward the organization and control of movement 
(Stoffregen, 2011 ).
The postural instability hypothesis suggests that a postural 
precursor of motion sickness is a parameter of postural activ -
ity that differs between individuals who (later) report being 
well versus sick (e.g., Munafo, Diedrick & Stoffregen, 2017 ; 
Stoffregen & Smart, 1998 ), or which differs as a function of 
the severity of subsequent sickness (e.g., Stoffregen et al., 
2013 ; Weech et al., 2018 ). Postural precursors of motion 
sickness have been identified in numerous settings, popula -
tions, and dependent variables, including:
●Head-mounted displays (Munafo et al., 2017 ; Arcioni 
et al., 2018 ; Merhi et al., 2007 ; Risi & Palmisano, 2019 ).
●Desktop VR technologies (Chang et al., 2017 , 2012 ; 
Chen et al., 2012 ; Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017 ; Dong 
et al., 2011 ; Stoffregen et al., 2014 , 2008 ; Stoffregen et al., 
2017 ; Villard et al., 2008 ).
●Military flight simulators (Stoffregen, Hettinger, Haas, 
Roe, & Smart, 2000 ).
●In moving rooms (Bonnet et al., 2006 ; Li et al., 2018 ; 
Smart et al., 2002 ; Stoffregen & Smart, 1998 ; Stoffregen 
et al., 2010 ; Walter et al., 2019 ).
●On ships at sea (Stoffregen et al., 2013 ).
●For postural activity during stance (e.g., Bonnet et al., 2006 ; 
Stoffregen et al., 2010 ; Walter et al., 2019 ) and while seated 
(Chen et al., 2012 ; Dong et al., 2011 ; Merhi et al., 2007 ; 
Stoffregen et al., 2000; Stoffregen et al., 2008 , 2014 ).
●For the “driver-passenger effect”. Postural precursors of 
motion sickness differ qualitatively between persons 
who do versus do not exert active control of visual 
motion stimuli. This effect has been demonstrated in 
virtual vehicles (Dong et al., 2011 ), and in virtual ambu -
lation (Chen et al., 2012 ). Postural precursors of motion 
sickness can differ between individuals who exert differ -
ent types of control over visual motion stimuli 
(Stoffregen et al., 2014 ).
●In pre-adolescent children (Chang et al., 2012 ), young 
adults (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017 ; Chang et al., 2017 ; 
Stoffregen & Smart, 1998 ; Walter et al., 2019 ), and mid-
dle-aged adults (Munafo et al., 2017 ).
●In men and women (Munafo et al., 2017 ; Koslucher 
et al., 2015 , 2016 ).●For a wide variety of dependent variables, many of 
which are orthogonal. These include the spatial magni -
tude of postural activity (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017 ; 
Stoffregen & Smart, 1998 ), temporal dynamics (e.g., 
Stoffregen et al., 2010 ; Villard et al., 2008 ), movement 
multifractality (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017 ; Koslucher et al., 
2016 ), the temporal coupling of postural activity with 
imposed motion (Walter et al., 2019 ), and postural 
“time-to-contact” (Li et al., 2018 ).
Researchers sometimes have mistakenly assumed that the 
postural instability hypothesis would be supported only if 
motion sickness was associated with increased spatial magni -
tude of postural activity (e.g., Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017 ; 
Widdowson et al., 2019 ); however, Riccio and Stoffregen 
(1991 ) did not make this prediction. Motion sickness has 
been preceded by an increase in the spatial magnitude of 
postural activity (e.g., Stoffregen & Smart, 1998 ), or by 
a decrease in spatial magnitude (e.g., Dennison & D’Zmura, 
2017 ; Stoffregen et al., 2008 ; Weech et al., 2018). Both results 
are consistent with the prediction of the postural instability 
hypothesis that postural sway will differ between persons who 
experience motion sickness and those who do not, and that 
such differences will exist before the onset of motion sickness 
symptoms (Stoffregen et al., 2008 ; Weech et al., 2018 ).
Based on this review, an important consideration to add to 
the updated R&D agenda includes:
●Determine what makes an individual susceptible to pos-
tural instability during XR use (e.g., vestibular migraine 
susceptibility; Lim et al., 2018 ).
In summary, Stoffregen and Riccio (1991 ) have provided 
much evidence in support of the postural instability hypoth -
esis, which has been supported by the many studies cited 
above. Based on this review, the design implications for 
cybersickness mitigation based on the ecological hypothesis 
have been summarized in Table 2.
6.Multisensory re-weighting and an alternate 
approach to cybersickness (Weech)
Weech et al. (2018a ) has sought to develop and test 
a perspective of cybersickness that focuses on its relationship 
to a crucial task of the CNS: accurate estimation and control 
of 3D orientation of head-and-body. This process requires as 
input a stream of noisy, multimodal cues and will ideally 
produce appropriate behavior as output. A study of cybersick -
ness from this perspective means, first, to assess how indivi -
dual differences in multimodal information processing might 
relate to discomfort in virtual spaces; and second, to develop 
interventions that aim to mitigate the damage caused when 
the CNS experiences a challenge in finding solutions to this 
control task.
Hardware, software, and user factors play a significant 
moderating role in the nauseogenicity of XR exposure, and 
what we know about cybersickness etiology has derived par-
tially from a careful study of the most provocative cases. 
Nausea is provoked by simulating user-motion in XR by 1794
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
moving the viewpoint independently of the head of the user 
(e.g., applying a “head bob”, passive navigation, or tracking 
jitter; Palmisano et al., 2007 ), by adjusting the visual gain of 
head movements (Chung & Barnett-Cowan, 2019 ), or by 
visual update failure during head motion (Kolasinski & U.S. 
Army Research Institute For The Behavioral And Social 
Sciences, 1995 ). In the Sensory cue conflict and cybersickness 
section above, the role of individual sensitivity to sensory cues 
was discussed, and the impact of miscalibrated visual displays 
was briefly mentioned in the introduction. The negative 
effects produced in these cases are often causally attributed 
to the conflict between expected patterns of multimodal input 
and those generated during these conditions (Oman, 1990 ; 
Reason & Brand, 1975 ; Watt, 1983 ). Prospective sites of “con -
flict detection” identified by monkey neurophysiology include 
the vestibular brainstem (Oman & Cullen, 2014 ), which is 
densely linked to emetic centers of the brain (Yates et al., 
2014 ). Thus, the sensory conflict hypothesis provides a strong 
model for cybersickness (Oman, 1990 ), which is supported by 
empirical and neurophysiological evidence (Oman & Cullen, 
2014 ; J. Wang & Lewis, 2016 ), and which has generated 
testable predictions about how to tackle the problem 
(Cevette et al., 2012 ; Reed-Jones et al., 2007 ; Weech et al., 
2018a ).
At the same time, the rate at which the cybersickness 
problem grows in severity is much faster than the rate of 
our scientific progress. The XR user base is orders of magni -
tude greater than a decade ago, and the most recently- 
developed XR hardware entirely eclipses even the most expen -
sive hardware from 10 years ago, by which time the bulk of 
our field’s research had already been carried out. Here, recent 
discoveries and advances in cybersickness research are high -
lighted with the hope of inspiring further research that, 
one day, leads to the reliable and universal solution to cyber -
sickness that currently eludes us.
Much of the recent research on cybersickness is informed 
by the finding that users often experience a mild form of 
inoculation to cybersickness with repeat exposure to XR. In 
the Evolutionary Hypothesis section of this paper, it is sug-
gested that the user “learns” to ignore the conflict between 
visual and vestibular information (i.e., sensory adaptation) to 
which they are exposed over time (Rebenitsch & Owen, 2016 ; 
Watt, 1983 ). This adaptation has been described as a sensory 
re-weighting process, where weights of visual cues are upre -
gulated relative to conflicting vestibular cues (Gallagher & 
Ferrè, 2018 ; Weech et al., 2018a ) according to principles of 
statistically optimal cue integration (Butler et al., 2010 ; Fetsch 
et al., 2010 ). In this framework, cues are down-weighted if 
they do not contribute to useful estimates of the state of the 
world or body; sensations that are high in reliability (such as 
vision) take precedence over noise-rich cues (as in the vestib -
ular modality). An example of the low variance of vision 
compared to vestibular cues can be seen in vection, the visual 
illusion of self-motion: visual motion dominates perception 
after a few seconds, resulting in the feeling that one’s body is 
in motion, regardless of the vestibular cues that indicate 
a static head during the initial period of visual surround 
motion (Weech & Troje, 2017 ).Recently, we have sought evidence about the aspects of 
sensorimotor processing that are most predictive of cybersick -
ness proclivity. A set of predictors was collected, including 
self-reports of vection strength, vestibular thresholds, and 
excursions of the body center-of- pressure from 30 partici -
pants. To eliminate collinearity, a principal components 
regression approach was adopted, which factors out correla -
tions and computes unique variances for each predictor. The 
resulting model, which was built using indices derived before 
exposure to VR, significantly predicted later cybersickness 
severity (R2 = 0.37, p =.018). The greatest unique variance in 
the model was carried by the postural sway during trials 
intended to elicit vection (see Figure 6a), and by inspecting 
the simple trends, one can see that increased visual motion- 
induced postural sway was associated with lower levels of 
cybersickness (r(28) = −0.53, p = .002; Figure 6b; Weech 
et al., 2018b ). One interpretation of these data is that those 
who rapidly re-weight multisensory cues are also those who 
Figure 6. (a) Principal component (PC) loadings for each predictor*; b) Negative 
correlation between postural sway during vection, and cybersickness (ΔCS) 
(Adapted from Weech et al., 2018b ). * Percentage values on left indicate the 
amount of variance in cybersickness scores accounted for by each PC; 
Percentage values on the bottom indicate the amount of unique variance in 
cybersickness scores accounted for by each predictor. Darker colors depict 
higher loadings, representing a greater expression of that factor on the PC. 
MSSQ = Motion Sickness Susceptibility Questionnaire score; EOF = Eyes Open 
Foam condition sway path length (SPL); ECF = Eyes Closed Foam condition SPL; 
V = Vection condition SPL; EOS = Eyes Open Standard condition SPL; ECS = Eyes 
Closed Standard condition SPL; VStr = Vection Strength ratings; Thresh = 
Vestibular Thresholds.INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1795 
are most protected against the provocative conditions of XR 
exposure. This account would also suggest that methods of 
facilitating vection might offer protection from cybersickness 
in XR. This is a prospect that has been tested in previous 
experiments, and the evidence appears to align with this 
suggestion.
One such piece of evidence comes from procedures that 
“re-couple” multimodal cues, either by physically moving an 
observer along with visual self-motion (Aykent et al., 2014 ; 
Dziuda et al., 2014 ; Kluver et al., 2015 ), or by stimulating the 
vestibular sense with mild current (galvanic vestibular stimu -
lation, GVS) to replicate missing acceleration cues (Cevette 
et al., 2012 ; Gálvez-García et al., 2014 ; Reed-Jones et al., 2007 ). 
Despite the efficacy of such methods, accurately replicating 
missing inertial cues is challenging. Based on the premise that 
noise modulates the reliability of sensory channels, we exam -
ined if adding sensory noise to the vestibular system can guide 
self-motion perception away from the zone of discomfort 
(conflicting multimodal cues) and toward a resolved percept 
(Weech & Troje, 2017 ). It was first established if visual dom -
inance can be facilitated using vestibular noise, which was 
applied using either stochastic electrical current (noisy GVS) 
or vibration of the mastoid bone (bone-conducted vibration, 
BCV). Results indicated a quickening of the vection response 
across the range of circular vection axes when transient ves-
tibular noise was applied, but not for seat vibration or air- 
conducted sound, which supports a vestibular origin for the 
effects.
In XR environments, vestibular noise can also modulate 
the cybersickness response. Results of a navigation task where 
participants piloted through virtual space with or without 
BCV revealed a reduction in sickness severity when BCV 
was used (Weech et al., 2018a ). The time-course of stimula -
tion was an important factor: For this short-duration experi -
ment, cybersickness was diminished only when stimulation 
was time-coupled to large visual accelerations. This time- 
specificity of cue integration in perceptual decision making 
is consistent with recent models (Parise & Ernst, 2016 ; Wong, 
2007 ). It has also been demonstrated that VR users who are 
exposed to tonic noisy GVS over a longer duration (30 min 
continuous) demonstrate a reduction of cybersickness (Weech 
et al., 2020b ).
Emerging evidence reveals the scope for cybersickness 
reduction interventions that target the multisensory cortex. 
Neuroimaging highlights a differential activation of tempor -
oparietal junction (a major multimodal integration site; 
Blanke, 2012 ) and occipital areas during cybersickness (Chen 
et al., 2010 ). Although recent evidence shows that trans- 
cranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to reduce cortical 
excitability over temporoparietal junction is associated with 
a reduced severity of cybersickness (Takeuchi et al., 2018 ), 
more studies are required to confirm these effects (tDCS 
paradigms have been criticized for non-reproducibility of 
late; e.g., Medina & Cason, 2017 ; Minarik et al., 2016 ).
Another cybersickness reduction technique involves the 
protective use of “presence,” the sense of “being there” in an 
XR environment. An increased level of presence has been 
associated with lower cybersickness, either due to the effects 
of the latter on attentional resources, or changes in the processing of multimodal stimuli during presence (Weech 
et al., 2019 a). Results of a recent study with a large sample 
of participants (Total N = 170) revealed that building an 
enriched narrative context in VR both increases levels of 
presence and reduces cybersickness severity (Weech et al., 
2020a ). This reduction was greatest for individuals at-risk to 
cybersickness, such as those unfamiliar with video games. 
Other top-down manipulations on cybersickness have 
demonstrated effectiveness in recent years, including findings 
that a positive smell (“rose”; Keshavarz et al., 2015 ) and 
pleasant-sounding music (Keshavarz & Hecht, 2014 ; Sang 
et al., 2006 ) can promote moderately better user comfort. 
Based on these limited findings, a presence consideration 
that was part of the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda and 
an additional consideration to add to the updated R&D 
agenda include:
●Determine relationship between presence, cybersickness, 
and adverse physiological aftereffects.
●Determine aspects of sensorimotor processing that are 
protective of cybersickness proclivity (e.g., ability to 
reweight sensory cues rapidly).
Based on these results and the associated review, the design 
implications for cybersickness mitigation based on multisen -
sory reweighting have been summarized in Table 2. In sum, it 
is clear that we are at an exciting time in cybersickness 
research. While much research has been focused on trying 
to further our understanding of cybersickness from the “sen -
sory re-weighting” approach, others have obtained evidence 
for the alternative approaches discussed in each respective 
hypothesis section above. Far from being a problem, this 
should be perceived as a healthy diversity of opinion in the 
cybersickness research field, and as a welcome reminder of the 
significant work still to be done before a single unifying 
theory of cybersickness is attained.
7.Operational implications of cybersickness: 
Considerations of a military use case (Dennison and 
Lawson)
Why should we care about cybersickness? As mentioned in 
the Introduction, XR technology is expanding into multiple 
domains from entertainment to commerce to industry to 
military operations. The envisioned applications are endless. 
Yet, if cybersickness cannot be resolved, XR could fall far 
short of its promise and, worse yet, create a divide between 
the susceptible and non-susceptible. As Lackner (2014 , 
p. 2495) noted:
“ … the range of sensitivity in the general population varies about 
10–1, and the adaptation constant also ranges from 10 to 1. By 
contrast, the decay time constant varies by 100–1. The import of 
these values is that susceptibility to motion sickness in the general 
population varies by about 10,000–1, a vast range.” 
The implication of these vast individual differences is that, 
while some people may be able to fully embrace the power 
and potential of XR technology, those who are highly suscep -
tible may be left on the sidelines watching this new era of XR- 1796
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
empowered productivity and entertainment pass them by. 
This could have future effects on career opportunities and 
progression. For example, the military is interested in learning 
how HWDs can aid Warfighters in performing multiple tasks 
in parallel and with greater efficiency. Such technologies have 
the potential to dramatically change the way that Warfighters 
train and fight. In fact, former Secretary of Defense James 
Mattis wanted all infantrymen to fight “25 bloodless battles” 
before they ever set foot in a real combat environment. If 
some service members are not able to tolerate such training, 
this could affect future selection as much as intractable air-
sickness affects pilot selection today.
Military immersive environments will be employed as part of 
realistic simulations of meaningful real-world events and opera -
tions, rather than as ways to introduce an element of entertain -
ment or fantasy into the user’s experience. For example, while it 
is advantageous for military training to be engaging (elevated 
arousal will make training to perform under stress more effec -
tive), many commonly employed aspects of first-person-shooter 
online gaming (such as respawning, unlimited ability to carry 
gear and ammunition, additional cues when a target is acquired, 
additional friend/foe cues, limited weapons noise, or recoil) do 
not yet apply to most real-world operations and would prove 
deleterious XR features for ensuring transfer of training from 
a game to actual combat.
The military applications where XR technologies are most 
likely to be beneficial include:
●Situations that are expensive to simulate (e.g., major war 
games, expensive-to-operate weapons, or platforms).
●Situations that are dangerous to practice in real life (e.g., 
putting out a shipboard fire).
●Situations that cannot be properly simulated in tradi -
tional group simulation devices or training centers, 
because they inherently require individually mounted 
technology (e.g., due to the necessary squad mobility 
and distributed operations with other team members 
needed to practice the mission).
●Scenarios where situated learning through embodied 
and contextualized training are beneficial, e.g., training 
combat medics/corpsmen to develop a casualty response 
plan and administer care (to an actual manikin with 
augmented reality injury overlays) while they are sub-
jected to virtual battlefield stressors. In such situations, 
AR (versus VR) will be most applicable.
●Operational scenarios where Warfighters can afford to 
be completely immersed without the need for extensive 
situational awareness of their immediate, real envir -
onment as part of their training (e.g., in a simulated 
Tactical Operations Center, the trainees usually do not 
need to have local views of the neighborhood around the 
training center in order to practice their mission). In 
such situations, VR (versus AR) will be most applicable.
In the military setting, performance contributing to mis-
sion success is the key outcome variable, rather than other 
considerations such as presence, vection, or cybersickness. 
However, if the service member does not feel well during 
XR immersion, this is concerning even if task performance does not deteriorate immediately, because it could cause ser-
vice members to avoid using XR training and operational 
support devices, and because the effects may build or persist 
after exposure, cause the susceptible individual to experience 
distracting sensations (such as fatigue or flashbacks) that 
could harm subsequent performance of other duties, or curtail 
motivation to keep up with lower-priority but important tasks 
(Birren, 1949 ), such as weapons cleaning.
Despite possible benefits of using XR training and opera -
tional support in workforce-related applications within the 
military and beyond, the strong likelihood of susceptible indi-
viduals experiencing cybersickness remains a significant con-
cern. We would argue that the magnitude of this cybersickness 
problem, and its implications to job performance and career 
progression, are poorly understood by society in general. This is 
not only due to problems with existing hardware, which are 
likely to be resolved, but with a lack of understanding of how 
cybersickness manifests, varies across individuals, and how it 
may be mitigated. This lack of understanding has resulted in 
a deemphasizing of the importance of cybersickness research 
being conducted, and rather a push for cybersickness as being 
something users will eventually just adapt to.
The negative symptoms associated with cybersickness are 
most often quantified through surveys and questionnaires, 
such as the SSQ (Kennedy et al., 1993 ). Although these meth -
ods are well-validated, they are difficult to administer in 
operational environments where the operator cannot pause 
for more than a few seconds, and they require the immersed 
operator to shift their focus away from their current task. This 
may not only decrease situation awareness within the XR 
environment, but also decrease the probability of operational 
success by adding more cognitive load to the operator. Thus, 
an automated solution to track symptom magnitude without 
user input is needed, such as monitoring of physiological 
responses or magnitude of head movements.
There is limited research showing the feasibility of training 
modern sensor systems to classify cybersickness symptom 
magnitude and onset. Research examining physiological data 
have been equivocal (Keshavarz et al., 2014 ), although some 
sensors and features, like those associated with respiratory 
(Denise et al., 2009 ; Dennison et al., 2016 ; Wang & Perry, 
2006 ), blinking (Kim et al., 2005 ; Ponder & Kennedy, 1927 ), 
cardiovascular (Money & Cheung, 1983 ; Ohyama et al., 2007 ), 
and gastrointestinal activity (Dennison et al., 2016 ), have been 
informative in several studies. Critically, the majority of these 
analyses examine data in a unimodal fashion, where changes 
in a single sensor system are compared with changes in the 
level of reported sickness during the experiment, or more 
commonly, on the SSQ after the experiment has concluded 
and the user has removed themselves from the XR environ -
ment (Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017 ; Dennison et al., 2016 , 
2016 ; Lin et al., 2007 ). Recent work has demonstrated that 
the analysis and subsequent extraction of meaningful features 
from multimodal data can be used to train machine learning 
models that classify cybersickness severity over time 
(Dennison et al., 2019 ). This work has shown that models 
trained on multimodal data outperform models constructed 
on only features garnered from unimodal sensor data in the 
majority of cases. Such systems may prove useful in INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1797 
Table 3. Recommended R&D Agenda to resolve cybersickness (update of Stanney et al., 1998 ).
Research area Action item Priority Term Progress to date
Basic 
knowledgeDetermine the various drivers of cybersickness and create 
a predictive model.2 M Models are in development concerning visual-vestibular 
conflicts, postural contributors, etc.
Establish means of determining user susceptibility to 
cybersickness and aftereffects.2 S-M Potential individual susceptibility predictors are being 
explored, such as past susceptibility, heritability, interpupillary 
distance, and postural control.
Establish countermeasures to aftereffects. 2 M Research continues on adaptation protocols, medications, 
behavioral ways to slow symptom progression (e.g., limiting 
head motion requirements), and technological 
countermeasures (e.g., earth-referenced display cues.
Identify factors that contribute to how provocative XR content 
is, and determine their relative weightings.3 M Some work has been done in this area, highlighting 
mismatched IPD, visual-vestibular mismatch, vergence- 
accommodation conflict, and other contributing factors.
Establish XR content design guidelines that assist in 
mitigating cybersickness.3 M Experimentation is still common with respect to software for 
XR. Some guidelines have been offered by leading companies, 
but these are already beginning to fall out of date.
Determine feasibility of testing an individual’s sensitivity to 
sensory depth cues and determine if such sensitivity is 
associated with more severe cybersickness.3 M While depth cue sensitivity has been evaluated in the lab, eye 
tracking in the headset may make it feasible to integrate such 
a metric into XR applications and adapt content accordingly.
Determine which sensory cues, beyond motion parallax, are 
sickness-inducing.3 M Work on sensitivity to motion parallax cues provides early 
indication of feasibility of evaluation at the sensory cue level.
Establish human adaptation schemes in XR applications. 2 M The time-course of adaptation is little studied apart from 
coarse details about single session and multi-session 
habituation.
Determine specific training methods or exposure protocols 
required to drive sensory adaptation within XR systems.3 M Some evidence of the appropriate length of exposure and 
break schedules have been suggested, but these are 
preliminary at best.
Determine what makes an individual susceptible to postural 
instability during XR use.3 M Links between vestibular migraine and postural instability 
have been observed.
Determine relationship between presence, cybersickness, and 
adverse physiological aftereffects.4 M Recent literature has revealed a highly intricate relationship 
between these factors, and a possible negative correlation 
between presence and CS. More needs to be done on 
establishing the modulating effects of task parameters on 
these factors.
Determine aspects of sensorimotor processing that are 
protective of cybersickness proclivity (e.g., ability to reweight 
sensory cues rapidly).3 M This research is in the early stages, with some evidence of its 
efficacy.
Technology Create wide FOV HWDs that support task performance and 
presence but do not elicit cybersickness.2 S Increases in FOV are inevitable and may reduce or increase 
cybersickness, depending upon the improvement in 
symptoms obtained via greater presence versus worsening of 
symptoms with greater visual flow. Technology should 
incorporate effective countermeasures and optimal tradeoffs 
between FOV, presence, and cybersickness.
Create powerful, lightweight, and untethered AR/VR HWDs. 1 S Devices are much lighter, brighter, and more immersive than 
before. Yet, size, weight, and unfamiliarity of current devices 
still contribute to the anxiety and disorientation that 
commonly underpin user discomfort in XR applications. 
A “glasses” form factor will help to reduce this psychological 
barrier.
Reduce visual latencies. 1 S While end-to-end latency has been much improved due to 
advances in the tracking and rendering pipeline, visual latency 
persists.
Create peripheral devices for senses beyond vision and 
audition.5 L Sound fidelity has improved markedly and audio based on a 
head-related transfer function will be a crucial step. Consumer 
haptic/tactile devices are implemented in a basic sense but 
scope for improvement remains. Vestibular stimulation is in 
a very young but exciting stage of development.
Integrate eye-tracking into XR devices. 2 S Eye tracking will allow user analytics for improved user 
experience and UI development, reduced workload, and 
improved graphical fidelity through foveated rendering, 
possibly reducing vergence accommodation conflict and 
oculomotor discomfort.
Evaluation Standardize subjective and objective measurement of 
aftereffects.1 S Too many symptom scales are used across labs and objective 
indicators lack specificity.
Establish product acceptance criteria and systems 
administration protocols to ensure that cybersickness and 
aftereffects are minimized.2 S Very few guidelines have been established for XR hardware.
Develop an understanding of the magnitude of the 
cybersickness problem and its implications to job 
performance and career progression.1 S While individual differences in cybersickness have been widely 
documented, their implication to mass adoption of XR 
technology have not been carefully examined.
Develop automated solutions to track cybersickness symptom 
magnitude during XR exposure.2 M Real-time physiological data have been adopted in the lab but 
specificity must be improved and transition to the 
marketplace has yet to occur.
(Continued ) 1798
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
operational environments. Extensive future research is neces -
sary to determine such alternative methods for tracking and 
mitigating the cybersickness issue, and to rule out physiolo -
gical changes that are not specific to cybersickness (but merely 
sensitive to cybersickness, arousal, anxiety, and other states). 
Based on these findings, important considerations to add to 
the updated R&D agenda include:
●Develop an understanding of the magnitude of the 
cybersickness problem and its implications to job per-
formance and career progression.
●Develop automated solutions to track cybersickness 
symptom magnitude during XR exposure.
8.Updated cybersickness R&D agenda
Expanding interest and growth of XR technology, and its 
applications to support the 21st century workforce, transform 
entertainment, and reshape commerce, necessitates an update 
of the cybersickness R&D agenda presented by Stanney et al. 
(1998 ). While progress has been made on action items pre-
sented in the 1998 agenda (see Table 3), the current review 
identifies many challenges left to be resolved and puts forth an 
amended agenda to invest in targeted research to drive toward 
resolution of the nettlesome cybersickness problem. 
Achieving this goal is paramount; as the world is eagerly 
embracing the potential of XR technology, but it faces the 
daunting challenge of the cybersickness which occurs when 
normal users are exposed to abnormal multisensory stimuli.
Building on the R&D Agenda presented by Stanney et al. 
(1998 ), the current review presents cybersickness challenges 
associated with general knowledge, XR technology, evaluation, 
and XR applications that are in need of study. The authors 
argue for extensive research (priority 1 – urgent and immedi -
ate resolution needed) to create powerful, lightweight, and 
untethered AR/VR HWDs, reduce visual latencies, standar -
dize subjective and objective measurement of aftereffects, with 
on-line measurement integrated into HWDs considered ideal, 
and develop an understanding of the magnitude of the cyber -
sickness problem and its implications to job performance and 
career progression. In addition, the following are considered 
critical research challenges (priority 2 – important to resolve 
in the short to medium term): create a wide FOV that sup-
ports task performance and presence but does not elicit 
cybersickness, determine the various drivers of cybersickness 
and create a predictive model, establish means of determining user susceptibility to cybersickness and aftereffects, establish 
countermeasures to aftereffects, establish human adaptation 
schemes in XR applications, develop an automated solution to 
track cybersickness symptom magnitude during XR exposure, 
integrate eye-tracking into XR devices, and establish product 
acceptance criteria and systems administration protocols to 
ensure that cybersickness and aftereffects will be minimized. 
From a utilitarian perspective, it is also deemed critically 
important (priority 2) to identify and evaluate value-added 
XR enterprise applications that drive mass adoption and cre-
ate collaborative XR systems. It is our hope that if this 
updated cybersickness R&D agenda is carefully carried out, 
it will render cybersickness a challenge of the past.
Acknowledgements and disclaimers
This paper is dedicated to the late Robert S. Kennedy, Ph.D., a world-leading 
expert in motion sickness and many other topics. His tireless work ethic, 
peerless intellect, and selfless mentorship were a gift to all those whose lives 
he touched. We would also like to thank Michael Stanney for his assistance 
with the references. This material is based upon work supported in part by 
the U.S. Army Medical Research & Development Command (USAMRDC) 
and the Joint Program Committee - JPC -1 at Fort Detrick, MD under 
Contract Number: MTEC-W81XWH1990005, National Science 
Foundation under Award No. CHS-1901423, Facebook Reality, and 
Google Daydream. The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this 
publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the Department of Defense and should not be construed as an official 
Department of the Army, Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, 
or the United States Government position, policy or decision unless so 
designated by other documentation. No official endorsement should be 
made. Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or 
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not 
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favor -
ing by the U.S. Government. This work was prepared in part by employees 
of the U.S. Government (Drs. Lawson and Dennison) as part of their official 
duties. Title 17 U.S.C. §105 provides that ‘Copyright protection under this 
title is not available for any work of the United States Government.’ Mention 
of commercial agencies or products does not imply endorsement by the 
authors.
References
Arcioni, B., Palmisano, S., Apthorp, D., & Kim, J. (2018 ). Postural 
stability predicts the likelihood of cybersickness in active 
HMD-based virtual reality. Displays , 58, 3–11. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.displa.2018.07.001
Aykent, B., Merienne, F., Guillet, C., Paillot, D., & Kemeny, A. (2014 ). 
Motion sickness evaluation and comparison for a static driving simu -
lator and a dynamic driving simulator. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering , 228 
(7), 818–829. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407013516101Table 3. (Continued). 
Research area Action item Priority Term Progress to date
Applications Identify and evaluate value-added XR applications, both 
personal and collaborative.2 M Current applications are strongly limited in the extent of user 
interaction. The advent of low-latency internet will allow 
major progress on simulated shared-space applications in 
coming years.
Develop value-added enterprise XR applications that drive 
mass adoption.2 S Several award-winning XR applications have been developed, 
and significant financial power has been devoted to this goal. 
However, the “value” of XR applications remains too low to 
overcome the burden of CS for most prospective users.
Priority (1-high to 5-low). 
S = Short term (0–1 year); M = Medium term (within 5 years); L = Long term (> 5 years). INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1799 
Bagce, H. F., Saleh, S., Adamovich, S. V., & Tunik, E. (2011 ). Visuomotor 
discordance in virtual reality: Effects on online motor control. 2011 
annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine 
and biology society , (pp. 7262–7265). Washington, DC: IEEE 
Computer Society. https://doi.org/10.1109/iembs.2011.6091835 .
Biocca, F. A., & Rolland, J. P. (1998 ). Virtual eyes can rearrange your 
body: Adaptation to visual displacement in see-through, 
head-mounted displays. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments , 7(3), 262–277. https://doi.org/10.1162/ 
105474698565703
Birren, J. E. (1949 ). Motion sickness: Its psychophysiological aspects. 
A survey report on human factors in undersea warfare , (pp. 
375–398). Washington, DC: National Research Council.
Blanke, O. (2012 ). Multisensory brain mechanisms of bodily 
self-consciousness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 13(8), 556–571. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3292
Bonnet, C. T., Faugloire, E., Riley, M. A., Bardy, B. G., & Stoffregen, T. A. 
(2006 ). Motion sickness preceded by unstable displacements of the 
center of pressure. Human Movement Science , 25(6), 800–820. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2006.03.001
Bos, J. E. (2011 ). Nuancing the relationship between motion sickness and 
postural stability. Displays , 32(4), 189–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
displa.2010.09.005
Bowman, D. A., Koller, D., & Hodges, L. F. (1998 ). A methodology for 
the evaluation of travel techniques for immersive virtual 
environments. Virtual Reality , 3(2), 120–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
bf01417673
Butler, J. S., Smith, S. T., Campos, J. L., & Bulthoff, H. H. (2010 ). 
Bayesian integration of visual and vestibular signals for heading. 
Journal of Vision , 10(11), 23. https://doi.org/10.1167/10.11.23
Carnegie, K., & Rhee, T. (2015 ). Reducing visual discomfort with HMDs 
using dynamic depth of field. IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications , 35(5), 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1109/mcg.2015.98
Cevette, M. J., Stepanek, J., Cocco, D., Galea, A. M., Pradhan, G. N., 
Wagner, L. S., Oakley, S. R., Smith, B. E., Zapala, D. A., & 
Brookler, K. H. (2012 ). Oculo-vestibular recoupling using galvanic ves-
tibular stimulation to mitigate simulator sickness. Aviation, Space, and 
Environmental Medicine , 83(6), 549–555. https://doi.org/10.3357/asem. 
3239.2012
Champney, R., Stanney, K. M., Hash, P., Malone, L., Kennedy, R. S., & 
Compton, D. (2007 ). Recovery from virtual environment exposure: 
Expected time-course of symptoms and potential readaptation 
mechanisms. Human Factors, 49(3), 491–506.
Chang, C.-H., Chen, F.-C., Kung, W.-C., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2017 ). Effects 
of physical driving experience on body movement and motion sickness 
during virtual driving. Aerospace Medicine and Human Performance , 88 
(11), 985–992. https://doi.org/10.3357/amhp.4893.2017
Chang, C.-H., Pan, -W.-W., Tseng, L.-Y., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2012 ). 
Postural activity and motion sickness during video game play in 
children and adults. Experimental Brain Research , 217(2), 299–309. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2993-4
Chemero, A. (2011 ). Radical embodied cognitive science . MIT Press.
Chen, Y.-C., Dong, X., Chen, F.-C., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2012 ). Control of 
a virtual avatar influences postural activity and motion sickness. 
Ecological Psychology , 24(4), 279–299. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10407413.2012.726181
Chen, Y.-C., Duann, J.-R., Chuang, S.-W., Lin, C.-L., Ko, L.-W., Jung, T.- 
P., & Lin, C.-T. (2010 ). Spatial and temporal EEG dynamics of motion 
sickness. NeuroImage , 49(3), 2862–2870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu 
roimage.2009.10.005
Chung, W., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2019 ). Perceived timing of passive 
self-motion relative to auditory stimuli with and without vision. 
Journal of Vision , 19(10), 301b. https://doi.org/10.1167/19.10.301b
Clower, D. M., & Boussaoud, D. (2000 ). Selective use of perceptual recali -
bration versus visuomotor skill acquisition. Journal of Neurophysiology , 
84(5), 2703–2708. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.84.5.2703
Condino, S., Carbone, M., Piazza, R., Ferrari, M., & Ferrari, V. (2020 ). 
Perceptual limits of optical see-through visors for augmented reality 
guidance of manual tasks. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , 67(2), 411–419. https://doi.org/10.1109/tbme.2019. 
2914517
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1987 ). From evolution to behavior: 
Evolutionary psychology as the missing link. In J. Dupre (Ed.), The 
latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality (pp. 277–306). 
The MIT Press.
Davis, S., Nesbitt, K., & Nalivaiko, E. (2015 , January). Comparing the 
onset of cybersickness using the Oculus Rift and two virtual roller 
coasters. Proceedings of the 11th Australasian Conference on 
Interactive Entertainment (IE 2015) , 167, 3–14. https://crpit.scem.wes 
ternsydney.edu.au/Vol167.html
Denise, P., Vouriot, A., Normand, H., Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A. 
(2009 ). Effect of temporal relationship between respiration and body 
motion on motion sickness. Autonomic Neuroscience , 151(2), 
142–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2009.06.007
Dennison, M., D’Zmura, M., Harrison, A., Lee, M., & Raglin, A. (2019 , 
May). Improving motion sickness severity classification through 
multi-modal data fusion. In Artificial intelligence and machine learning 
for multi-domain operations applications II (Vol. 11006, p. 110060T). 
Baltimore, Maryland: International Society for Optics and Photonics.
Dennison, M. S., & D’Zmura, M. (2017 ). Cybersickness without the 
wobble: Experimental results speak against postural instability 
theory. Applied Ergonomics , 58, 215–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apergo.2016.06.014
Dennison, M. S., Wisti, A. Z., & D’Zmura, M. (2016 ). Use of physiolo -
gical signals to predict cybersickness. Displays , 44, 42–52. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.displa.2016.07.002
Dong, X., Yoshida, K., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2011 ). Control of a virtual 
vehicle influences postural activity and motion sickness. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Applied , 17(2), 128–138. https://doi.org/10. 
1037/a0024097
Dunn, J. (2017 , March 22). Augmented reality will become a $50 billion 
business in 5 years, analysts say. Business Insider. https://www.busines 
sinsider.com/augmented-reality-virtual-reality-sales-idc-chart-2017-3
Dużmańska, N., Strojny, P., & Strojny, A. (2018 ). Can simulator sickness be 
avoided? A review on temporal aspects of simulator sickness. Frontiers in 
Psychology , 9(2132). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02132
Dziuda, Ł., Biernacki, M. P., Baran, P. M., & Truszczyński, O. E. (2014 ). The 
effects of simulated fog and motion on simulator sickness in a driving 
simulator and the duration of after-effects. Applied Ergonomics , 45(3), 
406–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2013.05.003
Ebenholtz, S. M., Cohen, M. M., & Linder, B. J. (1994 ). The possible role 
of nystagmus in motion sickness: A hypothesis. Aviation, Space, & 
Environmental Medicine , 65(11), 1032–1035.
Fernandes, A. S., & Feiner, S. K. (2016 ). Combating VR sickness through 
subtle dynamic field-of-view modification. IEEE symposium on 3D 
user interfaces 201-210 . Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Fetsch, C. R., DeAngelis, G. C., & Angelaki, D. E. (2010 ). Visual- 
vestibular cue integration for heading perception: Applications of 
optimal cue integration theory. European Journal of Neuroscience , 31 
(10), 1721–1729. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07207
Fidopiastis, C. M., Meyer, C., Fuhrman, K., & Rolland, J. P. (2003 ). 
Quantitative assessment of visual acuity in projection head-mounted 
displays. In C. E. Rash & E. R. Colin (Eds.), Proceedings of the SPIE 
Aerosense: Helmet- and Head-Mounted Displays VIII: Technologies and 
Applications , (vol. 7, pp. 399–406). https://doi.org/10.1117/12.486377
Fidopiastis, C. M. (2006 ). User-centered virtual environment assessment 
and design for cognitive rehabilitation applications . [Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation]. University of Central Florida.
Fidopiastis, C. M., Rizzo, A. A., & Rolland, J. P. (2010 ). User-centered 
virtual environment design for virtual rehabilitation. Journal of 
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation , 7(1), 11. https://doi.org/10. 
1186/1743-0003-7-11
Fulvio, J. M., Ji, M., & Rokers, B. (2020 ). Variation in visual sensitivity predicts 
motion sickness in virtual reality. bioRxiv 488817 . https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
488817
Gallagher, M., & Ferrè, E. R. (2018 ). Cybersickness: A multisensory 
integration perspective. Multisensory Research , 31(7), 645–674. 
https://doi.org/10.1163/22134808-201812931800
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
Gallagher, S. (2005 ). How the body shapes the mind . Oxford University 
Press.
Gálvez-García, G., Hay, M., & Gabaude, C. (2014 ). Alleviating simulator 
sickness with galvanic cutaneous stimulation. Human Factors , 57(4), 
649–657. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720814554948
Gibson, J. J. (1966 ). The senses considered as perceptual systems . 
Greenwood Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1979 ). The ecological approach to visual perception . Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A. (2005 ). Motion sickness. Current Opinion 
in Neurology , 18(1), 29–34. https://doi.org/10.1097/00019052- 
200502000-00007
Graybiel, A., & Knepton, J. (1976 ). Sopite syndrome: A sometimes sole 
manifestation of motion sickness. Aviation, Space, and Environmental 
Medicine , 47(8), 873–882.
Gruen, R., Ofek, E., Steed, A., Gal, R., Sinclair, M., & Gonzalez-Franco, 
M. (2020 ). Measuring system visual latency through cognitive latency 
on video see-through AR devices. 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual 
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) , 791–799. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
vr46266.2020.1580498468656
Hale, K. S., & Stanney, K. M. (Eds.). (2014 ). Handbook of virtual envir -
onments: Design, implementation, and applications (2nd edition). CRC 
Press.
Howard, I. P. (1982 ). Human visual orientation . John Wiley & Sons.
Hughes, C. L., Fidopiastis, C. M., Stanney, K. M., Bailey, P. S., Ruiz, E., 
Frye, D. L., & Karluk, F. J. (2020 , under review). Cybersickness profile 
associated with long-duration AR exposure . Frontiers in Virtual Reality.
IDC. (2020 , March 18). AR and VR headsets will see shipments decline in 
the near term due to COVID-19, but long-term outlook is positive, 
according to IDC. The Premier Global Market Intelligence Company. 
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS46143720
Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum, K. S., & Lilienthal, M. G. (1993 ). 
Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying 
simulator sickness. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology , 3(3), 
203–220. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327108ijap0303_3
Kennedy, R. S., Stanney, K. M., & Dunlap, W. P. (2000 ). Duration and 
exposure to virtual environments: Sickness curves during and across 
sessions. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments , 9(5), 
463–472. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474600566952
Keshavarz, B., Hecht, H., & Lawson, B. D. (2014 ). Visually-induced motion 
sickness: Causes, characteristics, and countermeasures. In K. S. Hale & 
K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments: Design, imple -
mentation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 647–698). CRC Press.
Keshavarz, B., & Hecht, H. (2014 ). Pleasant music as a countermeasure 
against visually induced motion sickness. Applied Ergonomics , 45(3), 
521–527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2013.07.009
Keshavarz, B., Stelzmann, D., Paillard, A., & Hecht, H. (2015 ). Visually 
induced motion sickness can be alleviated by pleasant odors. 
Experimental Brain Research , 233(5), 1353–1364. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00221-015-4209-9
Kim, Y. Y., Kim, H. J., Kim, E. N., Ko, H. D., & Kim, H. T. (2005 ). 
Characteristic changes in the physiological components of 
cybersickness. Psychophysiology , 42(5), 616–625. https://doi.org/10. 
1111/j.1469-8986.2005.00349.x
Kitazaki, M. (2013 ). Effects of retinal position on the visuo-motor adap -
tation of visual stability in a virtual environment. I-Perception , 4(4), 
242–252. https://doi.org/10.1068/i0534
Klüver, M., Herrigel, C., Preuß, S., Schöner, H. P., & Hecht, H. (2015 ). 
Comparing the incidence of simulator sickness in five different driv-
ing simulators. In Proceedings of driving simulation conference. 
Tübingen, Germany. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Malte_ 
Kluever/publication/279950289_Comparing_the_Incidence_of_ 
Simulator_Sickness_in_Five_Different_Driving_Simulators/links/ 
5655905c08ae4988a7b0b731/Comparing-the-Incidence-of-Simulator- 
Sickness-in-Five-Different-Driving-Simulators.pdf
Kolasinski, E. M., & U.S. Army Research Institute For The Behavioral 
And Social Sciences. (1995 ). Simulator sickness in virtual environments 
(No. ARI-TR-1027).
Koslucher, F., Haaland, E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2015 ). Sex differences in 
visual performance and postural sway precede sex differences in visually induced motion sickness. Experimental Brain Research , 234 
(1), 313–322. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-015-4462-y
Koslucher, F., Munafo, J., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2016 ). Postural sway in 
men and women during nauseogenic motion of the illuminated 
environment. Experimental Brain Research , 234(9), 2709–2720. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4675-8
Kruijff, E., Swan, J. E., II, & Feiner, S. (2010 ). Perceptual issues in 
augmented reality revisited. The IEEE international symposium on 
mixed and augmented reality (ISMAR 2010) 3–12. Washington, DC: 
IEEE Computer Society.
Kuiper, O. X., Bos, J. E., Diels, C., & Cammaerts, K. (2019 ). Moving base 
driving simulators’ potential for carsickness research. Applied 
Ergonomics , 81, 102889. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2019.102889
Lackner, J. R. (2014 ). Motion sickness: More than nausea and vomiting. 
Experimental Brain Research , 232(8), 2493–2510. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00221-014-4008-8
Lackner, J. R., & Graybiel, A. (1981 ). Variations in gravtoinertial force 
level affect the gain of the vestibulo-ocular reflex: Implications for the 
etiology of space motion sickness. Aviation, Space, & Environmental 
Medicine , 52(3), 154–158.
Lawson, B. D. (2014 ). Motion sickness symptomatology and origins. In 
K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments: 
Design, implementation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 531–600). CRC 
Press.
Lawson, B. D., & Riecke, B. E. (2014 ). The perception of body motion. In 
K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments: 
Design, implementation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 163–196). CRC 
Press.
Li, R., Walter, H., Curry, C., Rath, R., Peterson, N., & Stoffregen, T. A. 
(2018 ). Postural time-to-contact as a precursor of visually induced 
motion sickness. Experimental Brain Research , 236(6), 1631–1641. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-018-5246-y
Lim, Y.-H., Kim, J.-S., Lee, H.-W., & Kim, S.-H. (2018 ). Postural instabil -
ity induced by visual motion stimuli in patients with vestibular 
migraine. Frontiers in Neurology , 9(443). https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fneur.2018.00433
Lin, C. T., Chuang, S. W., Chen, Y. C., Ko, L. W., Liang, S.-F., & Jung, T.- 
P. (2007 ). EEG effects of motion sickness induced in a dynamic virtual 
reality environment. Proceedings of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine 
and Biological Society , 2, 3872–3875. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS. 
2007.4353178
Lin, J. J.-W., Duh, H. B. L., Parker, D. E., Abi-Rached, H., & Furness, T. A. 
(2002 ). Effects of field of view on presence, enjoyment, memory, and 
simulator sickness in a virtual environment. Proceedings IEEE Virtual 
Reality (pp. 164–171). https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2002.996519
Linden, A., & Fenn, J. (2003 ). Understanding Gartner’s hype cycles 
(Strategic Analysis Report Nº R-20-1971). Gartner, Inc, pp. 88.
Lubeck, A. J., Bos, J. E., & Stins, J. F. (2015 ). Motion in images is essential 
to cause motion sickness symptoms, but not to increase postural sway. 
Displays , 38, 55–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2015.03.001
McCauley, M. E., & Sharkey, T. J. (1992 ). Cybersickness: Perception of 
self-motion in virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments , 1(3), 311–318. https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1992.1.3.311
Medina, J., & Cason, S. (2017 ). No evidential value in samples of 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) studies of cognition 
and working memory in healthy populations. Cortex , 94, 131–141. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.06.021
Merhi, O., Faugloire, E., Flanagan, M., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2007 ). Motion 
sickness, console video games, and head-mounted displays. Human 
Factors , 49(5), 920–934. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872007x230262
Middleton, V. E., O’Keefe, J., & McIntyre, R. T. (1993 ). Virtual reality 
and analytical simulation of the soldier. Proceedings of 1993 winter 
simulation conference-(WSC’93) 1048–1052. Washington, DC: IEEE 
Computer Society.
Minarik, T., Berger, B., Althaus, L., Bader, V., Biebl, B., Brotzeller, F., 
Leitner, M., Jesteadt, L., Kalweit, L., Leitner, M., Linke, F., 
Nabielska, N., Reiter, T., Schmitt, D., Spraetz, A., Sauseng, P., & 
Fusban, T. (2016 ). The importance of sample size for reproducibility 
of tDCS effects. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 10(453). https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00453INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1801 
Money, K. E. (1990 ). Motion sickness and evolution. In G. H. Crampton 
(Ed.), Motion and Space Sickness (pp. 1–8). CRC Press.
Money, K. E., & Cheung, B. S. (1983 ). Another function of the inner ear: 
Facilitation of the emetic response to poisons. Aviation, Space, & 
Environmental Medicine , 54(3), 208–211.
Moss, J. D., & Muth, E. R. (2011 ). Characteristics of head-mounted 
displays and their effects on simulator sickness. Human Factors, 53 
(3), 308–319.
Munafo, J., Diedrick, M., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2017 ). The virtual reality 
head-mounted display Oculus Rift induces motion sickness and is 
sexist in its effects. Experimental Brain Research, 235, 889–901. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4846-7
Ohyama, S., Nishiike, S., Watanabe, H., Matsuoka, K., Akizuki, H., 
Takeda, N., & Harada, T. (2007 ). Autonomic responses during motion 
sickness induced by virtual reality. Auris Nasus Larynx , 34(3), 
303–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2007.01.002
Oman, C. M. (1982 ). A heuristic mathematical model for the dynamics 
of sensory conflict and motion sickness hearing in classical musicians. 
Acta Oto-Laryngologica , 94(sup392), 4–44. https://doi.org/10.3109/ 
00016488209108197
Oman, C. M. (1990 ). Motion sickness: A synthesis and evaluation of the 
sensory conflict theory. Canadian Journal of Physiology and 
Pharmacology , 68(2), 294–303. https://doi.org/10.1139/y90-044
Oman, C. M. (1998 ). Sensory conflict theory and space sickness: Our 
changing perspective. Journal of Vestibular Research , 8(1), 51–56. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/ves-1998-8107
Oman, C. M. (2012 ). Are evolutionary hypotheses for motion sickness 
“just-so” stories? Journal of Vestibular Research , 22(2,3), 117–127. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/ves-2011-0432
Oman, C. M., & Cullen, K. E. (2014 ). Brainstem processing of vestibular 
sensory exafference: Implications for motion sickness etiology. 
Experimental Brain Research , 232(8), 2483–2492. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00221-014-3973-2
Palmisano, S., Bonato, F., Bubka, A., & Folder, J. (2007 ). Vertical display 
oscillation effects on forward vection and simulator sickness. Aviation, 
Space, and Environmental Medicine , 78(10), 951–956. https://doi.org/ 
10.3357/asem.2079.2007
Parise, C. V., & Ernst, M. O. (2016 ). Correlation detection as a general 
mechanism for multisensory integration. Nature Communications , 7 
(1), 11543. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11543
Pascual-Leone, A., Amedi, A., Fregni, F., & Merabet, L. B. (2005 ). The 
plastic human brain cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28, 377– 
401. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144216
Petrock, V. (2020 , April 7). US virtual and augmented reality users 2020 . 
eMarketer. https://www.emarketer.com/content/us-virtual-and- 
augmented-reality-users-2020 .
Pettijohn, K. A., Geyer, D., Gomez, J., Becker, W. J., & Biggs, A. T. (2018 ). 
Postural instability and simulator seasickness. Aerospace Medicine and 
Human Performance , 89(7), 634–641. https://doi.org/10.3357/amhp.4998. 
2018
Ponder, E., & Kennedy, W. P. (1927 ). On the act of blinking. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Physiology , 18(2), 89–110. https://doi.org/10. 
1113/expphysiol.1927.sp000433
Prothero, J. D., & Parker, D. E. (2003 ). A unified approach to presence and 
motion sickness. In L. J. Hettinger & M. W. Haas (Eds.), Virtual and 
adaptive environments: Applications, Implications, and Human 
Performance Issues (pp. 47–66). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Reason, J. T. (1978 ). Motion sickness adaptation: A neural mismatch 
model. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine , 71(11), 819–829. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/014107687807101109
Reason, J. T., & Brand, J. J. (1975 ). Motion sickness . Academic Press.
Rebenitsch, L., & Owen, C. (2016 ). Review on cybersickness in applica -
tions and visual displays. Virtual Reality , 20(2), 101–125. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10055-016-0285-9
Reed, C., McGoldrick, J., Shackelford, J. R., & Fidopiastis, C. (2004 ). Are 
human bodies represented differently from other objects? Experience 
shapes object representations. Visual Cognition , 11(4), 523–550. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13506280344000428
Reed-Jones, R. J., Reed-Jones, J. G., Trick, L. M., & Vallis, L. A. (2007 ). 
Can galvanic vestibular stimulation reduce simulator adaptation syndrome? Proceedings of the 4th International Driving Symposium 
on Human Factors in Driver Assessment Training and Vehicle Design , 
534–540. https://doi.org/10.17077/drivingassessment.1288
Riccio, G. E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (1988 ). Affordances as constraints on 
the control of stance. Human Movement Science , 7(2–4), 265–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-9457(88)90014-0
Riccio, G. E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (1991 ). An ecological theory of motion 
sickness and postural instability. Ecological Psychology , 3(3), 195–240. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0303_2
Risi, D., & Palmisano, S. (2019 ). Effects of postural stability, active control, 
exposure duration and repeated exposures on HMD induced 
cybersickness. Displays , 60, 9–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2019.08. 
003
Rolnick, A., & Lubow, R. E. (1991 ). Why is the driver rarely motion sick? 
The role of controllability in motion sickness. Ergonomics , 34(7), 
867–879. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139108964831
Rossetti, Y., Rode, G., Farnè, A., & Rossetti, A. (2005 ). Implicit body 
representations in action. Advances In Consciousness Research , 62, 
111–125. https://doi.org/10.1075/aicr.62.08ros
Sang, F. D. Y. P., Billar, J. P., Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A. 
(2006 ). Behavioral methods of alleviating motion sickness: 
Effectiveness of controlled breathing and a music audiotape. 
Journal of Travel Medicine , 10(2), 108–111. https://doi.org/10. 
2310/7060.2003.31768
Sekiyama, K., Miyauchi, S., Imaruoka, T., Egusa, H., & Tashiro, T. 
(2000 ). Body image as a visuomotor transformation device revealed 
in adaptation to reversed vision. Nature , 407(6802), 374–377. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/35030096
Serge, S. R., & Moss, J. D. (2015 ). Simulator sickness and the Oculus 
Rift. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
Annual Meeting , 59(1), 761–765. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1541931215591236
Smart, L. J., Stoffregen, T. A., & Bardy, B. G. (2002 ). Visually induced 
motion sickness predicted by postural instability. Human Factors , 44 
(3), 451–465. https://doi.org/10.1518/0018720024497745
Stanney, K., Fidopiastis, C., & Foster, L. (2020 ). Virtual reality is sexist: 
But it does not have to be. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 7(4). https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00004
Stanney, K., Salvendy, G., Deisinger, J., DiZio, P., Ellis, S., 
Ellison, J., … Witmer, B. (1998 ). Aftereffects and sense of pre-
sence in virtual environments: Formulation of a research and 
development agenda. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction , 10(2), 135–187. https://doi.org/10.1207/ 
s15327590ijhc1002_3
Stanney, K. M., Kennedy, R. S., & Hale, K. S. (2014 ). Virtual environ -
ments usage protocols. In K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), 
Handbook of Virtual Environments: Design, Implementation, and 
Applications (2nd ed., pp. 797–809). CRC Press.
Stanney, K. M., Nye, H., Haddad, S., Padron, C. K., Hale, K. S., & 
Cohn, J. V. (2020 , in press). eXtended reality (XR) environments. In 
G. Salvendy & W. Karwowski (Eds.), Handbook of human factors and 
ergonomics . (5th) ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Stanney, K. M., Hale, K. S., Nahmens, I., & Kennedy, R. S. (2003 ). What 
to expect from immersive virtual environment exposure: Influences of 
gender, body mass index, and past experience. Human Factors , 45(3), 
504–520. https://doi.org/10.1518/hfes.45.3.504.27254
Stanney, K. M., & Kennedy, R. S. (1998 ). Aftereffects from virtual 
environment exposure: How long do they last? Proceedings of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 42(21), 
1476–1480. https://doi.org/10.1177/154193129804202103
Stanney, K. M., Kennedy, R. S., Drexler, J. M., & Harm, D. L. (1999 ). 
Motion sickness and proprioceptive aftereffects following virtual 
environment exposure. Applied Ergonomics , 30(1), 27–38. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/s0003-6870(98)00039-8
Stoffregen, T. A. (2011 ). Motion sickness considered as a movement 
disorder. Movement & Sport Sciences , 74(3), 19. https://doi.org/10. 
3917/sm.074.0019
Stoffregen, T. A., & Bardy, B. G. (2001 ). On specification and the senses. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 24(2), 195–213. https://doi.org/10. 
1017/s0140525x010039461802
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
Stoffregen, T. A., Chang, C.-H., Chen, F.-C., & Zeng, W.-J. (2017 ). 
Effects of decades of physical driving on body movement and motion 
sickness during virtual driving. Plos One, 12(11), e0187120. https:// 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187120
Stoffregen, T. A., Chen, F.-C., Varlet, M., Alcantara, C., & Bardy, B. G. 
(2013 ). Getting your sea legs. PLoS ONE , 8(6), e66949. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0066949
Stoffregen, T. A., Chen, Y.-C., & Koslucher, F. C. (2014 ). Motion control, 
motion sickness, and the postural dynamics of mobile devices. 
Experimental Brain Research , 232(4), 1389–1397. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00221-014-3859-3
Stoffregen, T. A., Faugloire, E., Yoshida, K., Flanagan, M. B., & Merhi, O. 
(2008 ). Motion sickness and postural sway in console video games. 
Human Factors , 50(2), 322–331. https://doi.org/10.1518/ 
001872008x250755
Stoffregen, T. A., Hettinger, L. J., Haas, M. W., Roe, M. M., & Smart, L. J. 
(2000 ). Postural instability and motion sickness in a fixed-base flight 
simulator. Human Factors, 42(3) 458–469. https://doi.org/10.1518/ 
001872000779698097
Stoffregen, T. A., Mantel, B., & Bardy, B. G. (2017 ). The senses consid -
ered as one perceptual system. Ecological Psychology , 29(3), 165–197. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.2017.1331116
Stoffregen, T. A., & Riccio, G. E. (1988 ). An ecological theory of orienta -
tion and the vestibular system. Psychological Review , 95(1), 3–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.95.1.3
Stoffregen, T. A., & Riccio, G. E. (1991 ). An ecological critique of the 
sensory conflict theory of motion sickness. Ecological Psychology , 3(3), 
159–194. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0303_1
Stoffregen, T. A., & Smart, L. J. (1998 ). Postural instability precedes 
motion sickness. Brain Research Bulletin , 47(5), 437–448. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/s0361-9230(98)00102-6
Stoffregen, T. A., Yoshida, K., Villard, S., Scibora, L., & Bardy, B. G. 
(2010 ). Stance width influences postural stability and motion sickness. 
Ecological Psychology , 22(3), 169–191. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10407413.2010.496645
Stone, W.B. (2017 ). Psychometric evaluation of the Simulator Sickness 
Questionnaire as a measure of cybersickness . [Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation]. Iowa State University. https://doi.org/10.31274/etd-180810- 
5050
Takeuchi, N., Mori, T., Suzukamo, Y., & Izumi, S.-I. (2018 ). Modulation 
of excitability in the temporoparietal junction relieves virtual reality 
sickness. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking , 21(6), 
381–387. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2017.0499
Treisman, M. (1977 ). Motion sickness: An evolutionary hypothesis. 
Science , 197(4302), 493–495. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.301659
Villard, S. J., Flanagan, M. B., Albanese, G. M., & Stoffregen, T. A. 
(2008 ). Postural instability and motion sickness in a virtual moving 
room. Human Factors , 50(2), 332–345. https://doi.org/10.1518/ 
001872008x250728
Vovk, A., Wild, F., Guest, W., & Kuula, T. (2018 ). Simulator sickness in 
augmented reality training using the Microsoft HoloLens. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (pp. 1–9). Montreal QC Canada. https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3173574.3173783
Wada, T., Konno, H., Fujisawa, S., & Doi, S. (2012 ). Can passengers’ 
active head tilt decrease the severity of carsickness? Human Factors , 54 
(2), 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720812436584
Walter, H. J., Li, R., Munafo, J., Curry, C., Peterson, N., & Stoffregen, T. A. 
(2019 ). Unstable coupling of body sway with imposed motion precedes 
visually induced motion sickness. Human Movement Science , 64, 389–397. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2019.03.006
Wang, J., & Lewis, R. F. (2016 ). Contribution of intravestibular sensory 
conflict to motion sickness and dizziness in migraine disorders. Journal of Neurophysiology , 116(4), 1586–1591. https://doi.org/10. 
1152/jn.00345.2016
Wang, X., & Perry, A. C. (2006 ). Metabolic and physiologic responses to video 
game play in 7- to 10-year-old boys. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine , 160(4), 411. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.160.4.411
Watt, D. G. D. (1983 ). Sensory and motor conflict in motion sickness. 
Brain, Behavior and Evolution , 23(1–2), 32–35. https://doi.org/10. 
1159/000121485
Webster, M. A. (2015 ). Visual adaptation. Annual Review of Vision 
Science , 1(1), 547–567. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision 
-082114-035509
Weech, S., Kenny, S., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2019 ). Presence and cyber -
sickness in virtual reality are negatively related: A review. Frontiers in 
Psychology , 10(158). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00158
Weech, S., Kenny, S., Lenizky, M., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2020a ). 
Narrative and gaming experience interact to affect presence 
and cybersickness in virtual reality. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies , 138, 102398. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102398
Weech, S., Moon, J., & Troje, N. F. (2018a ). Influence of bone-conducted 
vibration on simulator sickness in virtual reality. Plos One, 13(3), 
e0194137. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194137
Weech, S., & Troje, N. F. (2017 ). Vection latency is reduced by 
bone-conducted vibration and noisy galvanic vestibular stimulation. 
Multisensory Research , 30(1), 65–90. https://doi.org/10.1163/22134808- 
00002545
Weech, S., Varghese, J. P., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2018 ). Estimating the 
sensorimotor components of cybersickness. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
120(5), 2201–2217.
Weech, S., Varghese, J. P., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2018b ). Estimating the 
sensorimotor components of cybersickness. Journal of Neurophysiology , 
120(5), 2201–2217. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00477.2018
Weech, S., Wall, T., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2020b ). Reduction of cyber -
sickness during and immediately following noisy galvanic vestibular 
stimulation. Experimental Brain Research , 238(2), 427–437. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00221-019-05718-5
Welch, R. B. (1978 ). Perceptual modification : Adapting to altered sensory 
environments . Academic Press.
Welch, R. B. (1986 ). Adaptation of space perception. In K. R. Boff, 
L. Kaufman, & J. P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of perception and 
human performance (pp. 24). John Wiley and Sons.
Welch, R. B., & Mohler, B. J. (2014 ). Adapting to virtual environments. In 
K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments: 
Design, implementation, and applications (pp. 627–646). CRC Press.
Welch, R. B., & Sampanes, A. C. (2008 ). Adapting to virtual environ -
ments: Visual-motor skill acquisition versus perceptual recalibration. 
Displays , 29(2), 152–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2007.09.013
Weser, V., & Proffitt, D. R. (2019 ). Tool embodiment: The tool’s output 
must match the user’s input. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 12 
(537). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00537
Widdowson, C., Becerra, I., Merrill, C., Wang, R. F., & LaValle, S. 
(2019 ). Assessing postural instability and cybersickness through 
linear and angular displacement. Human Factors , 
001872081988125. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819881254
Wong, K.-F. (2007 ). Neural circuit dynamics underlying accumulation of 
time-varying evidence during perceptual decision making. Frontiers in 
Computational Neuroscience , 1(6). https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.10.006. 
2007
Yates, B. J., Catanzaro, M. F., Miller, D. J., & McCall, A. A. (2014 ). 
Integration of vestibular and emetic gastrointestinal signals that pro-
duce nausea and vomiting: Potential contributions to motion sickness. 
Experimental Brain Research , 232(8), 2455–2469. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00221-014-3937-6INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
 1803 
