International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: 1044-7318 (Print) 1532-7590 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hihc20
Identifying Causes of and Solutions for
Cybersickness in Immersive Technology:
Reformulation of a Research and Development
Agenda
Kay Stanney, Ben D. Lawson, Bas Rokers, Mark Dennison, Cali Fidopiastis,
Thomas Stoffregen, Séamas Weech & Jacqueline M. Fulvio
To cite this article: Kay Stanney, Ben D. Lawson, Bas Rokers, Mark Dennison, Cali Fidopiastis,
Thomas Stoffregen, Séamas Weech & Jacqueline M. Fulvio (2020) Identifying Causes of
and Solutions for Cybersickness in Immersive Technology: Reformulation of a Research
and Development Agenda, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 36:19,
1783-1803, DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
© 2020 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 04 Nov 2020.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 14502
View related articles
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 97 View citing articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
2020, VOL. 36, NO. 19, 1783–1803
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1828535
SURVEY ARTICLE
Identifying Causes of and Solutions for Cybersickness in Immersive Technology:
Reformulation of a Research and Development Agenda
Kay Stanneya, Ben D. Lawsonb, Bas Rokersc, Mark Dennisond, Cali Fidopiastisa, Thomas Stoffregene, Séamas Weechf,
and Jacqueline M. Fulviog
aDesign Interactive, Inc, USA; bNaval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory, Groton, USA; cPsychology, New York University, Abu Dhabi, UAE; dU.S.
Army Combat Capabilities Development Command, Army Research Laboratory, USA; eSchool of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
USA; fSchool of Physical and Occupational Therapy, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; gDepartment of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, USA
ABSTRACT
Immersive technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality, initially failed to live up to expecta-
tions, but have improved greatly, with many new head-worn displays and associated applications
being released over the past few years. Unfortunately, ‘cybersickness’ remains as a common user
problem that must be overcome if mass adoption is to be realized. This article evaluates the state of
research on this problem, identifies challenges that must be addressed, and formulates an updated
cybersickness research and development (R&D) agenda. The new agenda recommends prioritizing
creation of powerful, lightweight, and untethered head-worn displays, reduction of visual latencies,
standardization of symptom and aftereffect measurement, development of improved countermea-
sures, and improved understanding of the magnitude of the problem and its implications for job
performance. Some of these priorities are unresolved problems from the original agenda which
should get increased attention now that immersive technologies are proliferating widely. If the
resulting R&D agenda is carefully executed, it should render cybersickness a challenge of the past
and accelerate mass adoption of immersive technologies to enhance training, performance, and
recreation.
1. Introduction: Identifying causes of and solutions a dramatically different scale. It provides operational sup-
for cybersickness: Reformulation of a research and port at the point-of-need, thereby accelerating task perfor-
development agenda mance while improving safety and reducing downtime and
costs. It allows for training of essential skills through safe,
Virtual and augmented reality (AR) technology provides sen-
contextually relevant, and embodied immersive experiences,
sory input to users that often simulates real-world stimuli.
even in rare and hazardous scenarios, such as training oil
The approaches taken by virtual and augmented reality are
slightly different. Virtual reality (VR) aims to substitute vir- rig workers to handle emergencies or sailors to put out ship
tual for real stimulation for one or more sensory organs. fires. It can support physicians in reaching patients in
Augmented reality, on the other hand, blends real and virtual underserved and remote areas, and support diagnostics,
stimulation. Of course, surreal stimuli can be added to VR or surgical planning, and image-guided treatment. It is des-
AR as well. In any of these cases, virtual aspects of sensory tined to reshape commerce, by supporting remote explora-
input are presented with the goal of having users interact with tion of physical products, enhancing remote customer
them as if they are real. support, and fostering interactive branding. It can also
Following industry practice, we will use the term revolutionize tourism via the integration of interactive ele-
eXtended reality (XR) when we refer to the shared aspects ments into hotel experiences, augmented tourist points-of-
of virtual and augmented reality. eXtended Reality could interest, and immersive navigation assistance when explor-
transform the way we work, learn, and play. Besides its ing new places.
wide use in entertainment and gaming, XR has significant Despite the vast promise XR technology presents,
applications in the domains of education, manufacturing, a nettlesome motion sickness (a.k.a. cybersickness) problem
training, health care, retail, and tourism (Stanney et al., exists (McCauley & Sharkey, 1992). The cybersickness asso-
2020). It can transform education by permitting interaction ciated with XR exposure often includes nausea, disorientation,
with environments far removed, long gone, or of oculomotor disturbances, drowsiness (a.k.a. sopite syndrome),
CONTACT Kay Stanney kay@designinteractive.net Design Interactive, Inc., Orlando, FL 32789, USA
This article was originally published with errors, which have now been corrected in the online version. Please see Correction (http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10447318.
2020.1865601)
© 2020 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
1784 K. STANNEY ET AL.
and other discomforts (Graybiel & Knepton, 1976; Stanney quality and are more affordable than some smartphones today.
et al., 2014). At least 5% of VR users will not be able to In fact, the time has finally come when tens of millions of XR
tolerate prolonged exposure, and ~1% of users will experience headsets have been sold worldwide, but mentions of unpleasant
retching or vomiting, typically during prolonged exposure to symptoms are emerging again in the news and are regularly
a fully immersive VR headset (Stanney et al., 2003; Lawson, discussed on blog posts. Therefore, it is appropriate to revisit the
2014). cybersickness problems discussed by Stanney et al. (1998) and to
Cybersickness can linger long after XR exposure and compro- identify any needed modifications to the recommended R&D
mise postural stability, hand-eye coordination, visual functioning, agenda.
and general well-being. These aftereffects generally result from the
individual’s sensorimotor adaptation to the immersive experience,
which is a natural and automatic response to an intersensorily 2.2. Are we seeing the rebirth of XR now or merely
imperfect virtual experience and is elicited (and often resolved) by another hype cycle?
the plasticity of the human nervous system, which recalibrates
The original Stanney et al. (1998) paper cited a prediction that
continuously to new inputs (Stanney et al., 1998). It is speculated
VR would be widespread by approximately 2008. It appears
that the problem is less severe in AR, as compared to VR, but that
that true dissemination did not begin until nearly a decade
assumption has yet to be fully validated.
later than predicted, but it is now fully underway. The evi-
To discuss potential solutions for cybersickness, a special ses-
dence that XR is undergoing a revival derives from Google
sion was held at the 1997 Human Computer Interaction (HCI)
Trends searches, unit sales statistics, and research publication
International Conference. As a result of that (largely NASA-
trends, which are described below.
sponsored) session, a research and development (R&D) agenda
Google Trends searches reveal that VR interest did not rise
was formulated (Stanney et al., 1998). High priority recommenda-
steeply until the mid-2010s (see Figure 1a screen captures
tions included developing an understanding of the role of sensory
from trends.google.com). Interest rose quickly following the
discordance, employing human adaptation schedules, developing
2013 introduction of the earliest developer version of the
and implementing design guidelines to minimize sensory con-
Oculus Rift. For the first time, users had access to VR of
flicts, developing standardized subjective and objective measures
acceptable quality for under 500 USD which created
of aftereffects to quantify the problem, establishing countermea-
a tipping point for sales, with several competitor VR headsets
sures to sensory cue conflicts, and improving head tracking tech-
marketed shortly thereafter. Interest in AR was already sur-
nology and system response latency. Since that session, significant
ging at that time and has remained strong (see Figure 1b),
advances have been made in our understanding of the causes
while interest in VR has waned a bit in recent years, perhaps
underlying cybersickness and technology facilitating XR applica-
because of consistent reports of cybersickness, and the need to
tions. To evaluate progress since the 1997 special session, assess the
completely remove a user from real-world viewing. This is
current state of the field, and identify future challenges,
reflected in the latest headset usage estimates, with
a workshop entitled Cybersickness: Causes and Solutions was con-
52.1 million people anticipated to use VR, as compared to
vened in Los Angeles CA, at the SIGGRAPH 2019 conference
83.1 million anticipated to use AR at least once per month in
(Special Interest Group on Computer GRAPHics and Interactive
2020 (Petrock, 2020).
Techniques). This paper engages the participants from that work-
The Google Trends searches above are fairly consistent
shop in formulating an updated R&D agenda, three of whom
with evidence concerning the increasing sales curve of VR
participated in the development of the original 1998 agenda.
and AR around this same time (Dunn, 2017), as units num-
bered in the millions worldwide and are projected to become
even more common by 2024 (see Table 1).
2. Consolidation of the literature (Lawson and
The surge in general interest and sales of XR appears to
Stanney)
match the increase in studies by research and technical
2.1. Cybersickness revisited: The rationale for this paper
Immersive technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality,
initially failed to live up to inflated expectations. They have since
improved greatly, traveling along the popular (but hypothetical)
Gartner Hype Cycle of innovation (Linden & Fenn, 2003) and
emerging from the “trough of disillusionment” (p. 2), which con-
tributed to waning interest in the 1990s. These immersive tech-
nologies appear to be nearing the “plateau of productivity” (p. 2),
with mainstream adoption on the horizon. Unfortunately, cyber-
sickness (a type of motion sickness associated with prolonged
immersion) remains as a common user problem that stands in
the way. Stanney et al. (1998) described key cybersickness-related
R&D problems that would need to be solved before VR technology
could live up to its potential and achieve mass adoption. This paper Figure 1. Popularity of search terms “virtual reality” (1a) and “Augmented
Reality” (1b), Implying a resurgence of interest in VR ca. 2015 and a Growing
garnered much interest, but is due for an update, as VR and AR
Interest in AR ca. 2011. (Peak popularity is assigned 100, 50% of this peak is
systems are now commercially available that are of acceptable assigned 50, etc.).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1785
Table 1. XR headset sales by type. ● Develop value-added enterprise XR applications that
XR headset type 2020 units sold estimate 2024 units sold estimate drive mass adoption.
AR 0.690 M 41.11 M
VR 6.37 M 35.61 M
Total 7.06 M 76.72 M Beyond value-added applications, the authors believe that
Source: IDC Worldwide Quarterly AR and VR Headset Tracker, March 18, 2020 one of the most important factors determining mass adop-
tion of XR technology is cybersickness. Interest in cybersick-
ness was high in the early 2000s (see Figure 3a), likely due to
VR disenchantment following the over-hyping of VR cap-
abilities in the 1990s and a growing popular awareness of
how commonly cybersickness was induced (Stanney et al.,
1998). Concomitant with the increasing recent XR sales and
usage, there has been a resurgence of interest in searches for
the word “cybersickness.” This trend cannot be explained by
a similar recent surge in interest in analogous maladies such
as “simulator sickness” (see Figure 3b). The authors conjec-
ture that interest in cybersickness is surging because there
are far more XR users now, yet the modern XRs they use still
cause cybersickness. This malady must be resolved if XR
Figure 2. Google scholar articles per year from 1998–2019, showing AR closing technology is to experience mass adoption. The updated
the gap with VR.
R&D agenda presented herein is intended to be a step
toward such resolution. The next section of this paper
describes the theories, probable causes, symptoms, and inci-
groups, as reflected by the growing number of Google Scholar
dence of cybersickness associated with early and recent XR
Articles from 1998 to 2019 focused on “virtual reality” and
technology.
“augmented reality” (see Figure 2).
Considering the trends described above for Google Trends
searches, usage statistics, unit sales, and scholarly publica-
tions, we can assert that the age of ubiquitous XR technology 2.3. Cybersickness: A continuing obstacle to XR use?
finally seems to have arrived. Only time will tell if sales will
While XR applications are no longer as limited by cost,
continue to grow as predicted (Dunn, 2017; IDC, 2020). Will
processing speed, or available software, it is possible that
the years 2015–2020 someday be considered the “renaissance
cybersickness will limit proliferation as much as it did for
of XR,” or merely another “hype bubble?” The answer to this
earlier generations of XR technology (Hale & Stanney, 2014),
question will depend upon the existence of useful XR software
unless effective countermeasures are implemented. How pre-
applications and alleviation of cybersickness. As was recom-
valent is cybersickness with current XR? What are the symp-
mended in the Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda, more value-
toms? What causes cybersickness and how can it be
added, widely adopted enterprise applications for AR and VR
mitigated? The rest of this paper considers such questions
are still needed today to ensure XR dissemination, so the
and highlights important knowledge gaps requiring further
present authors feel this should be maintained in the current
study. Our intent is to formulate a broad R&D agenda to
updated R&D agenda:
ensure that the initial promise of XR is realized and to ensure
that XR is “here to stay” as a valued aspect of training,
● Identify and evaluate value-added XR applications, both operational support, commerce, and entertainment. We will
personal and collaborative. first describe the latest information concerning the incidence
Figure 3. Popularity of search terms “Cybersickness” (3a) and “Simulator Sickness” (3b), implying a resurgence of interest specific to Cybersickness, ca. 2015, around
the same time interest in XR Increased (see Figure 1, and Dunn, 2017). (100 = peak interest, 50 = 50% peak, etc.).
1786 K. STANNEY ET AL.
of cybersickness, which is important in determining whether incidence of cybersickness has changed versus previous gen-
it is still a problem. erations, and it comes from studies designed to elicit at least
mild symptoms. An update to VR incidence estimates comes
from a recent dissertation by Stone (2017), who observed that
2.4. User susceptibility to cybersickness
64/195 (32.8%) of subjects playing one of the three dynamic
Cybersickness incidence estimates imply that early VR headsets video games (for an average of 9–19 min) using an HTC
(available ca. 1994–2010) elicited adverse symptoms among >60% Vive™ (a current generation VR headset) said they “somewhat
of users during their first exposure, with 40–100% being deemed agree” or “strongly agree” that the experience was nauseating
motion sick (depending on the criteria, systems, tasks, and expo- (with 5.6% saying “strongly agree”). Davis et al. (2015) pro-
sure durations across five studies reviewed), 5% quitting prema- vided another incidence estimate which applies to adults
turely, and 5% experiencing no symptoms (Lawson, 2014). While using an Oculus Rift and stimuli consisting of two intention-
XR systems have begun proliferating worldwide due to their ally disturbing roller coaster scenarios. Under that level of
affordability, cybersickness was still observed shortly after the challenge, at least one of the two coaster simulations caused
introduction of the latest generation of VR headsets, such as the 12/12 participants to get mild (or worse) nausea, with 17%
Oculus Rift (Serge & Moss, 2015). The introduction of these quitting in one simulation and 66% in the other.
headsets addressed some of the headset-related recommendations Overall, the limited cybersickness findings with the latest
from the Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda by creating bright, HWDs imply that: a) Cybersickness has not been eliminated
low-cost head-worn displays (HWDs). Other desired headset with the newest generation of headsets; b) As with past
features are still lacking, however, such as a wide field-of-view systems, incidence of cybersickness varies greatly (due to
(FOV; current displays are still limited to ~100O) that supports large differences in devices, stimuli, usage protocols, indivi-
task performance and presence but is free from cybersickness dual physiology, and measures of sickness); c) At least one-
(wider FOV often increases cybersickness; Lin et al., 2002). Also third of users will experience discomfort during VR usage; d)
needed are untethered HWD with as much processing speed as AR usage may be less problematic but more research is
their tethered counterparts and further reduction in headset needed to back this assertion; e) At least 5% of XR users are
weight, as extended wear can still be physically fatiguing. expected to experience severe symptoms in the latest genera-
The 1998 R&D agenda also called for reduced latencies tion headsets.
(but visual latency issues persist today; see Gruen et al., One factor that can affect cybersickness incidence is the
2020), establishment of cross-platform software with portabil- ergonomics of the VR. The Oculus Rift VR headset such as
ity (which Unity, Unreal Engine, and other development plat- that used by Davis et al. is not expected to fit, on average, 16%
forms now support), improved tracking technology (now of females and 1% of males based on its interpupillary dis-
often seamlessly integrated into the VR/AR headset technol- tance (IPD) range of adjustment, while the Oculus Quest will
ogy itself), and creation of better haptic interfaces (tactile and not fit 7% of females and 1% of males; so while the latest VR
force feedback is still rudimentary, but hand tracking and headsets are closing the IPD mismatch gap, there is still room
gesture recognition have been integrated into some VR/AR for improvement. When the visual displays in a VR are not
headsets). While modern multicore processors have made it positioned in front of each eye properly, normal visual accom-
possible to render complex auditory environments over head- modation and binocular vision are challenged, leading to
phones integrated into headsets, other senses have yet to be perceptual distortion, eyestrain, headache, etc. While Oculus
incorporated adequately (including, vestibular, chemical, or is one of the most accommodating designs in terms of ergo-
non-haptic somatosensory cues such as body cutaneous and nomic fit, any person without a good IPD fit could experience
kinesthetic stimuli). In fact, it is unlikely that the eXtended greater cybersickness (Stanney et al., 2020), and a poor fit is
Reality Turing Test could be passed for any XR scenarios more common among people of smaller average stature, such
involving body locomotion or driving until natural vestibular as women. Could this be the reason that some past studies
and somatosensory cues are adequately simulated (Lawson & have claimed that women are more susceptible to cybersick-
Riecke, 2014; Middleton et al., 1993). Based on these findings ness than men? Stanney et al. (2020) noted that another
and considerations, recommendations from the Stanney et al. popular VR, the HTC Vive VR headset, is not expected to
(1998) R&D agenda that should be maintained include: fit, on average, ~35% of females and ~16% of males based on
its adjustable IPD range. This IPD fit/no-fit variable, when
● Create a wide FOV that supports task performance and incorporated into a predictive model of cybersickness, was
presence but does not elicit cybersickness. found to be the primary driver of cybersickness recovery
● Create powerful, lightweight, and untethered AR/VR time, with a secondary driver being motion sickness history
HWDs. (Stanney et al., 2020). Women have been reported to be more
● Reduce visual latencies. susceptible to motion sickness in only 50% of the studies in
● Create peripheral devices for senses beyond vision and the literature (Lawson, 2014), with women being reported
audition. more susceptible far less often in controlled laboratory studies
(versus surveys). Stanney et al. concluded that it could be the
What can we conclude about the incidence of cybersick- ergonomics of the technology and not sex differences that
ness in newer XR? While cybersickness still occurs in the drive cybersickness up in females using certain types of VR.
present generation of VR headsets, there is very limited evi- Many other confounding factors contribute to observed sex
dence in the literature to enable one to discern whether the differences in motion sickness (Lawson, 2014), some of which,
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1787
like IPD, imply that not all users are experiencing the same 2.5. Etiological hypotheses
stimulus. Thus, presently, it cannot be said definitively that
The Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda identified the need to
women have been proven to be more susceptible to motion
develop a better theoretical understanding of cybersickness
sickness, nor that, when differences are observed, they are due
in terms of sensory discordance and human adaptation time-
to sex, per se.
lines. This has yet to be fully achieved. While the facts for
Based on the findings in this section, important considera-
which a complete motion sickness theory must account have
tions in the Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda that should be
been stipulated (Lawson, 2014), there are many knowledge
maintained in the current recommendations include:
gaps concerning causes of cybersickness and no definitive,
universally accepted theory. For this reason, the term
● Determine the various drivers of cybersickness and cre- “hypothesis” was used throughout this paper to refer to the
ate a predictive model. competing schools-of-thought on cybersickness, with a focus
● Establish means of determining user susceptibility to on identifying practical recommendations that can be
cybersickness and aftereffects. derived from each one. Specifically, three widely known
● Establish countermeasures to aftereffects. hypotheses and one new one are introduced briefly, below,
● Identify factors that contribute to how provocative XR with an emphasis on their contributions to the updated R&D
content is, and determine their relative weightings. agenda and implications for cybersickness mitigation
expounded. However, the reader should be aware of other
important hypotheses concerning motion sickness, which
There is a general belief that AR HWDs will not have the
have emphasized the role of eye movements, rest frames,
same level of physiological adverse impact on users compared
perceived vertical, and ontological development of motor
to VR; however, there are limited data to back this assertion.
control – a critical review of more than ten motion sickness
The evidence available comes from Vovk, Wild, Guest, and
hypotheses (or variants of hypotheses) is provided by
Kuula (2018), who claimed AR engenders negligible cyber-
Keshavarz et al. (2014). Four examples of hypotheses are
sickness, yet they excluded a relatively large number (>15%)
provided below.
of outliers in their data. Hughes et al. (2020) found
Sensory conflict hypothesis. The sensory conflict (or neural
a Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) symptom profile
mismatch) hypothesis of motion sickness, which is the most
of Oculomotor > Disorientation > Nausea (O > D > N) in
widely cited, postulates that motion sickness is due to sensory
a current generation immersive AR headset (Microsoft
conflicts between expected patterns of afferent/reafferent sig-
HoloLens 1), with an average Total sickness SSQ score of
nals from visual, auditory, tactile, kinesthetic, and vestibular
23.69 (S.D. = 21.73) immediately following 3–40 min expo-
activity established through previous experiences and what is
sures with 30 min breaks between sessions, which puts AR
being experienced in a novel environment (Oman, 1998;
firmly in the “Medium” intensity range (75th percentile)
Reason & Brand, 1975). For example, there can be
based on VR system SSQ percentiles (Stanney et al., 2014).
a mismatch between what the proprioceptive (tactile, kines-
With VR systems, a Total SSQ > 20.1 is generally associated
thetic, vestibular) senses indicate is happening in the real
with adverse physiological effects (e.g., ataxia, degraded hand-
world (e.g., sitting still in a chair while wearing a VR headset),
eye coordination, VOR shifts) and dropouts (users quitting).
versus what the visual and auditory senses are indicating in
As an augmentation to symptom measures such as the SSQ,
the virtual world (e.g., accelerating through a virtual environ-
physiological measures of adverse aftereffects should be
ment), which causes a perceptual conflict that is often sick-
explored with long-duration AR exposure, to determine if
ness-inducing. The visual contributors to this mismatch are
there is a similar adverse physiological impact and whether
not as profound in AR because AR typically allows for view-
this is associated with dropouts. Finally, usage protocols
ing of real-world rest frames, such as walls, floors, etc., which
should be explored further, such as in Hughes et al. (2020),
is one reason AR systems tend to elicit less overt nausea than
who found that when a usage protocol of 6–20 min AR
VR systems. Potential limitations of the sensory conflict
sessions with 30 min breaks between sessions was employed,
hypothesis are described in the Ecological Hypothesis section
the average Total SSQ score dropped to 15.71 (S.D. = 10.4)
of this paper and in detail in Keshavarz and Hecht (2014).
immediately post-exposure, which is approaching the “Low”
Evolutionary hypothesis. The evolutionary (or poison)
range (25th percentile; Stanney et al., 2014). Based on these
hypothesis is an expansion of the sensory conflict hypothesis,
findings, important considerations that were part of the
which seeks to explain the origins of the most cardinal symp-
Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda that should be maintained
toms of the motion sickness response (viz., nausea and vomit-
include:
ing) (Money, 1990; Treisman, 1977). This is a hypothesis
concerning the origin of motion sickness rather than the
● Standardize subjective and objective measurement of specific aspects of a stimulus immediately causing motion
aftereffects. If possible, on-line measurement approaches sickness. The hypothesis is that nausea and vomiting due to
should be established that are integrated into XR systems. sensory cue conflicts are an indirect by-product of an ancient
● Establish product acceptance criteria and systems evolutionary adaptation poison defense system that is being
administration protocols to ensure that cybersickness accidentally triggered by modern challenging situations of real
and aftereffects are minimized. or apparent motion (the latter of which is prevalent in XR
1788 K. STANNEY ET AL.
systems). The brain has evolved in such a way that it mistakes contribute to useful estimates of the physical body while
modern real/apparent motion stimuli causing disorganization immersed in the virtual world, will experience a mild form
to typical patterns of vestibular, visual, and somatosensory of inoculation to cybersickness with repeat exposure to XR.
information as instead representing a natural toxin-related Thus, individual multisensory reweighting speed may factor
malfunction in the central nervous system (CNS), which initi- into the degree to which an individual experiences
ates an emetic response as a defense mechanism. cybersickness.
Oman (2012) has pondered whether the evolutionary Each one of these hypotheses, and their contributions to
hypothesis is an overly “adaptationist” explanation for cyber- the updated R&D agenda, will now be discussed in more
sickness, as it assumes “that evolution has shaped all pheno- detail. The reader will note that there is a diverse range of
typic traits for survival advantage” (Oman, 2012, p. 117). The opinions and approaches among the named section authors
key assumptions of the evolutionary hypothesis were recently discussing this dynamic field of inquiry.
challenged by Lawson (2014) who argued (in the direct evolu-
tionary hypothesis) that there are plausible means by which
3. Sensory cue conflict and cybersickness (Fulvio and
ancient forms of real or apparent motion could have contrib-
Rokers)
uted directly to the evolution of aversive reactions (without
the need for a co-opted poison response). Extending this idea, The sensory conflict hypothesis of motion sickness attributes
Lawson offered a modification of Triesman’s poison hypoth- cybersickness to conflicts between expected sensory cues
esis (the direct poison hypothesis), which argues that the evo- established through previous experiences and those currently
lutionary circumstances that caused the ingestion of toxins or being experienced in a novel environment (Oman, 1998;
intoxicants were the same circumstances in which unusual, Reason & Brand, 1975). In particular, conflicts between ves-
maladaptive motions of ancient origin frequently were pre- tibular and visual motion cues, prominent in VR systems,
sent. Therefore, the human motion sickness response did not appear to be particularly troublesome. It is known that indi-
have to evolve accidentally by generalizing a poison response viduals vary in their sensitivity to such sensory cues.
to modern motions, but could have evolved directly, because Specifically, individuals show considerable variability in
the ancient circumstances under which our primate ancestors cybersickness propensity and severity – some individuals can
could become poisoned (or intoxicated) also were circum- tolerate only very brief exposure to XR (minutes or less),
stances which harmed their evolutionary fitness directly dur- whereas others seem limitless in their tolerance (hours). This
ing natural conditions of real-body motion and/or visual-field range of cybersickness susceptibility suggests that there are
motion. other characteristics that also vary among individuals and
Ecological hypothesis. Under the ecological hypothesis relate to cybersickness. Their identification can make it easier
(also known as the postural instability hypothesis), motion to predict in advance who will be likely to experience dis-
sickness is postulated to be caused by alterations of pos- comfort when using XR, and, more importantly, to develop
tural control (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1991). This hypothesis solutions that mitigate the effects. We thus tested the a priori
suggests that a primary behavioral goal of humans is to prediction that individuals with greater sensitivity to sensory
maintain postural stability, and thus as postural instability cues will be more likely to detect sensory conflicts when
increases, motion sickness develops. Postural instability is placed in XR environments, and will therefore be more sus-
suggested to occur in novel environments in which “we fail ceptible to cybersickness. As such, individual differences in
to perceive the new dynamics or … are unable to … cue sensitivity should predict differences in cybersickness
execute the control actions that are appropriate for the susceptibility.
new dynamics” (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1991, p. 204); it lasts A large sample of undergraduate students (n = 95; 59
until the individual can adapt to the novel motion cues. As females), most of whom had little to no experience with VR
with sensory conflict hypothesis, potential limitations of devices, completed a two-part study in which they were first
the ecological hypothesis or related findings have been measured for their sensitivity to different sensory cues to
raised (Bos, 2011; Golding & Gresty, 2005; Keshavarz motion-in-depth presented in a VR HWD, and then sepa-
et al., 2014; Lackner, 2014; Lubeck et al., 2015; Pettijohn rately measured for their propensity for cybersickness while
et al., 2018). viewing video content in the same VR display. Finally, the
Multisensory re-weighting hypothesis. Another expansion of relationship between the two measures for the different sen-
the sensory conflict hypothesis is the multisensory reweighting sory cues was quantified in order to (i) test the prediction that
hypothesis, which suggests that susceptibility to cybersickness greater sensitivity to sensory cues is associated with more
may be associated with an individual’s ability to rapidly severe cybersickness; and to (ii) determine which sensory
reweight (Oman, 1990) conflicting multisensory cues in XR cues in particular are sickness-inducing.
environments, such as visual-vestibular mismatches Sensitivity to sensory cues was measured using a dot
(Gallagher & Ferrè, 2018). Whereas in the real world, vestib- motion direction discrimination task viewed in a VR HWD
ular cues are highly weighted, due to their lack of validity in (see Figure 4a). Sensitivity to 3D motion defined by four sets
immersive environments, vestibular cues must be down- of sensory cues was tested (see Figure 4b). One type of 3D
weighted to resolve sensory conflicts, which are most pro- motion was defined by binocular cues only. This Binocular
nounced in fully immersive VR headsets. Those who can motion was presented as a cloud of dots to both eyes such that
rapidly adapt to these conflicts, for example, by upregulating when viewed in the VR display, a single cloud of dots
visual cues relative to conflicting vestibular cues that do not appeared to be moving toward or away from the participant
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1789
Figure 4. Assessing the sensitivity to motion in depth under different cue conditions* (Adapted from Fulvio, Ji, & Rokers, 2020). * a) Observers viewed random dot
motion stimuli in an Oculus DK2 head-mounted display (HMD). The stimuli simulated dots that moved toward or away from the observer through a cylindrical
volume. The proportion of signal dots (coherence), which moved coherently either toward or away, and noise dots, which moved randomly through the volume, was
varied in a random, counterbalanced order across trials. Observers reported the perceived motion direction. Stimuli were presented in a virtual environment that
consisted of a room (the insert depicts a “zoomed out” view) with a 1/f noise-patterned plane located 1.2 m from the observer. b) Dot motion was defined by one of
four sets of sensory cues, presented in a randomized blocked order. Binocular dot motion contained binocular cues to depth (i.e., changing disparity, inter-ocular
velocity), but lacked monocular cues to depth (i.e., dot density and size changes). Monocular dot motion contained monocular cues to depth but lacked binocular
cues. Combined cues dot motion contained both binocular and monocular cues. Full VR dot motion contained binocular and monocular cues and motion parallax
cues associated with head-motion contingent updating of the display. c) Psychometric functions were fit to the percentage of “toward” responses at each motion
coherence level to obtain the slope (σ) of the fit for each observer in each cueing condition. Sensitivity in each cueing condition was defined as the inverse of the
slope, with larger values indicating greater sensitivity. d) Histograms of the distribution of sensitivities across observers in each of the four cueing conditions reveal
considerable variability both within and across conditions. Sensitivity tends to be greater in combined cue conditions compared to when cues are presented in
isolation.
on each trial, within the context of a larger virtual room. sensory cue conditions (see Figure 4d). Not surprisingly,
Importantly, monocular information (dot size and density sensitivity was greater when more cues to 3D motion were
changes) was removed from this stimulus. A second type of available (i.e., compare “Combined cues” and “Full VR” to
3D motion was defined by monocular cues only. This “Binocular” and “Monocular”).
Monocular motion was presented as a cloud of dots to only The critical question, however, is whether these differences
one eye within the same virtual room on each trial, with the in sensitivity relate to and predict differences in cybersickness.
other eye viewing only the virtual room. Thus, binocular Cybersickness propensity was measured in a separate task in
information was removed so that the motion direction of which the same participants viewed up to 22.5 min of bino-
the dots (toward or away) was defined by the dot size and cular, head-fixed video content that increased in intensity.
density changes in the single eye’s view. A third type of 3D The video content included footage of a first-person car
motion included both binocular and monocular cues – ride, computer-generated video footage of a first-person
Combined Cue Motion – thus presenting the motion with fighter jet flight through a canyon, footage of a first-person
dot size and density changes to both eyes within the virtual drone flight through a parking lot, and footage of a first-
room. Finally, the fourth type of 3D motion included bino- person drone flight around a bridge. Participants had the
cular, monocular, and motion parallax cues due to head- option of quitting if viewing became intolerable. Both prior
motion contingent updating of the VR display – Full VR to and after viewing the videos, participants completed the 16-
Motion. The motion was presented in the same way as the item SSQ (Kennedy et al., 1993). Cybersickness propensity/
combined cues motion, but the viewpoint of the scene chan- severity was quantified by the difference in the total sickness
ged according to participants’ head movements. score between post- and pre-video viewing.
The four types of dot motion were presented in blocks and The video footage was intended to be sickness-inducing to
the order of the blocks was random and counterbalanced allow for a range of sickness across individuals. Indeed, the
across participants. Within a block, the dots had different video footage led to significant sickness on average compared
coherence levels, such that lower coherence values made dis- to baseline, but across individuals, there was considerable
crimination of dot motion direction more difficult. Individual variability in severity (see Figure 5a). Critically, when indivi-
sensitivity to the individual sensory cue conditions was dual sensitivity in each of the four sensory cue conditions was
defined as the slope of the psychometric curve fit to related to the change in cybersickness due to video-viewing,
a participant’s data across all motion coherence values – larger trends were uncovered of the expected relationship whereby
slopes implied greater sensitivity (see Figure 4c). As expected, larger sensitivity was associated with greater sickness in all
large variability in sensitivity was found across participants for conditions, but only in the Full VR sensory cue condition was
any given sensory cue condition, as well as variability across the relationship significant after correcting for multiple
1790 K. STANNEY ET AL.
● Establish XR content design guidelines that assist in
mitigating cybersickness.
In addition, important considerations to add to the updated
R&D agenda include:
● Determine feasibility of testing an individual’s sensitivity
to sensory depth cues and determine if such sensitivity is
associated with more severe cybersickness.
● Determine which sensory cues, beyond motion parallax,
are sickness-inducing.
In conclusion, the primary outcome of this sensory con-
flict-based research may seem problematic for XR – those
who would derive the best experiences from XR would also
be those who could tolerate the experience the least. However,
the results suggest possible solutions. Ideas for cybersickness
mitigation are summarized in Table 2, based upon the impli-
Figure 5. Sensory cue sensitivity predicts cybersickness severity* (Adapted from
cations from a variety of theoretical approaches to the pro-
Fulvio, Ji, & Rokers, 2020). * a) After viewing binocular, head-fixed video content
in the VR HMD, observers reported significantly greater levels of cybersickness blem, which are described in this paper, including sensory/cue
compared to baseline reports obtained at the beginning of the study. However, conflict (this Section 3), the evolutionary hypothesis (the next
sickness-inducing effects of the video content were highly-variable among
Section 4), the ecological hypothesis (Section 5), and the
observers, with some individuals appearing to be relatively immune to cyber-
sickness. b) Change in motion sickness as a function of sensory cue sensitivity. multisensory re-weighting hypothesis (Section 6). We turn
Observers’ sensitivity to the Full VR dot motion predicted their susceptibility to next to the implications of the evolutionary approach.
cybersickness with video viewing. The relationship was not significant in the
other cue conditions. This suggests that sensitivity to motion parallax cues in
particular is an important factor susceptibility to cybersickness.
4. Evolutionary hypothesis: Implications of human-
system adaptation to cybersickness (Fidopiastis and
comparisons (see Figure 5b). It is noted that the Full VR
Stanney)
sensory cue set is the only one of the four that includes
motion parallax. Moreover, the video footage was head- The evolutionary hypothesis implies that the brain recognizes
fixed – it did not update according to the participants’ head certain sensorimotor conflicts as toxins that must be expelled.
movements – and therefore lacked motion parallax cues. Such conflicts may occur during integration of vergence-
Further, head movements made during the video viewing accommodation, visual-vestibular, or visual-vestibulo-
created conflicts with movements implied by the footage itself. somatosensory (tactile/kinesthetic) information while using
Taken together, the specificity of the relationship XR headsets. Specifically, donning an HWD in an XR envir-
between sensitivity to the Full VR condition and cybersick- onment with limited FOV, optical distortions, static projec-
ness and the potential for motion parallax-related conflict tion depth planes, and certain types of sustained active
during video viewing implicate sensitivity to motion paral- motions are expected to present conflicts that elicit cybersick-
lax cues as an important predictor of cybersickness. As ness with associated maladaptation in visual, vestibular, or
predicted, those individuals who had greater sensitivity to psychomotor systems (e.g., changes in accommodation, ver-
motion parallax information experienced greater discomfort gence, vestibulo-ocular reflex [VOR], ataxia, or maladroit
when that information was absent or in conflict. Future hand-eye coordination). Since “the evolutionary function of
work can test other XR applications to determine how the human brain is to process information in ways that lead to
sensitivity to different cues may impact cybersickness adaptive behavior” (Cosmides & Tooby, 1987, p. 282), and
under various scenarios. For those sensitive to cue conflicts, maladaptive behaviors associated with XR exposure could be
design techniques can be employed to attempt to minimize harmful, XR systems should be designed such that human
sensory conflicts and thus reduce cybersickness, such as sensorineural mechanisms associated with discordance are
teleportation, concordant motion, alignment of head/body minimized; otherwise cybersickness and associated potentially
with virtual motion, speed modification, and provision of harmful maladaptation may manifest.
visual cues that match or minimize vestibular cues When an XR experience sufficiently perturbs perceptual
(Bowman et al., 1998; Carnegie & Rhee, 2015; Dennison cues within virtual or augmented operational environments
& D’Zmura, 2017; Fernandes & Feiner, 2016; Keshavarz, that define the nature of the world and indicate how to per-
Hecht, & Lawson, 2014; Kuiper et al., 2019; Prothero & form actions, cybersickness will occur (Kruijff et al., 2010;
Parker, 2003; Wada et al., 2012). Welch & Mohler, 2014). Thus, cybersickness is not predicted
Based on this review, an important consideration that was as a result of all intersensory conflict conditions. Furthermore,
part of the Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda that should be those individuals who can quickly adapt their sensorimotor
maintained includes: responses to XR environments may avoid sickness altogether
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1791
Table 2. Potential cybersickness mitigation strategies implied by different etiological hypothesis.
Underlying Cybersickness mitigations
hypothesis
(and section
discussed)
Sensory cue conflict ● Upon initial XR exposure, minimize or eliminate motion parallax cues so users can acclimate to the XR experience.
(Sects. 2.5, 3) ● Gradually step-up motion parallax cues over time.
● If a user begins to feel discomfort, diminish the motion parallax cues once again.
● Include options to minimize the amount of head movement/motion parallax required.
● Use teleportation (but note that this can increase disorientation and hinder spatial awareness).
● Add concordant motion (e.g., a motion-base to reduce visual-vestibular conflicts).
● Ask observers to actively align their head/body to the behavior of the virtual motion they are experiencing.
● Limit or slow forward speed and acceleration to reduce visual scene motion.
● When conflicts persist:
○ Provide visual cues that match the vestibular system, such as by adding inertially stable visual motion cues (e.g., a fixed-horizon).
○ Minimize vestibular cues through depth-of-field blur, peripheral blur, or dynamic field of view, the latter of which involves modifying
FOV based on speed and angular velocity.
Evolutionary ● Foster sensory adaptation via perceptual recalibration by highlighting visuomotor discordances in order to engender a sense of body
(2.5, 4) ownership and drive sensorimotor adaptation in XR environments.
● Foster sensory adaptation via visual-motor skill alterations by using representational feedback that appears to arise from manipulation
of the XR environment.
Ecological ● XR should be used while seated, and users should be encouraged to use a headrest.
(2.5, 5) ● Design XR dynamics that support rather than degrade postural stability.
● Use motion sensor data (from headsets) to identify individuals at risk for cybersickness.
● Modulate XR dynamics in real time to suppress unstable postural activity.
Multisensory ● Promoting rapid re-weighting of multisensory cues may protect against the provocative conditions of XR exposure.
reweighting ● Methods of facilitating vection might offer protection from cybersickness in XR.
(2.5, 6) ● “Re-couple” multimodal cues, either by physically moving an observer along with visual self-motion or by stimulating the vestibular
sense with mild current (galvanic vestibular stimulation, GVS) to replicate missing acceleration cues.
● Use of vestibular noise can modulate the cybersickness response.
● Expose users to tonic noisy GVS over a long duration (30 min continuous) to reduce cybersickness.
● Consider using tDCS to reduce the severity of cybersickness.
● Increase presence to lower cybersickness.
● Use positive smells and pleasant-sounding music to promote user comfort.
(McCauley & Sharkey, 1992). Characterizing sensory conflicts such fMRI research demonstrate the time course and localiza-
that lead to cybersickness is complex given the myriad of ways tion error reduction of sensor-motor adaptation that one can
that XR technology, coupled with computer graphics techni- expect to experience in XR environments; such adaptation is
ques, negatively impact human intersensory and sensorimotor typically associated with a loss in cue sensitivity when exposed
integration. XR technology thus redefines human perception to a perturbing sensory conflict (Webster, 2015). The fMRI
of the natural world and perturbs multimodal cues that assist results further suggest a potential for broader change in
with visuomotor coordination (Welch & Mohler, 2014). visuomotor function that includes coding new brain repre-
Nonetheless, human perceptual and sensorimotor systems sentations such as body schemas as an outcome of a positive
are dynamic and allow humans to adapt to such diverse or more functional adaptation process. As aforemen-
rearrangements of spatial information (Welch, 1986). tioned, these and other psychophysical data suggest that
Adaptation as a process can be quick, as in visual coding visuomotor adaptation to XR stimuli can occur within min-
(Webster, 2015), or more gradual, as in the outcome or end utes of XR exposure (M. S. Dennison et al., 2016; Moss &
state of the adaptation (Welch, 1978). Most research evaluat- Muth, 2011) or over longer periods of time as changes register
ing effects of adaptation associated with XR exposure are end- beyond the retina to higher perceptual areas (Kitazaki, 2013).
state results that quantify prolonged changes (i.e., aftereffects) Overtime, such adaptation is expected to mitigate cybersick-
in perception or shifts in perceptual motor coordination that ness. To better understand the role of adaptation as
reduce or eliminate inter-sensory conflicts (Stanney & a mitigation for cybersickness, a human-centered approach
Kennedy, 1998; Stanney et al., 1999). Yet, reducing the adap- is needed where symbiosis between human and technology is
tation process to only a hierarchical sensory loop may be why achieved (Fidopiastis et al., 2010).
there are conflicting theories as to how best to use adaptation Adaptation can be considered a multichannel process, as it
as a mitigation for cybersickness. relies on complex neural processing in multiple interacting
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of persons networks of both motor and sensory systems (i.e., receptors,
experiencing adaptation when wearing prism glasses provides such as retina or limb). Thus, adaptation effects are not
information on how the brain changes in response to inter- localized to the level of the sensor alone (Webster, 2015),
sensory conflicts induced by visuomotor discrepancies but are rather manifest at the brain level in action networks,
(Sekiyama et al., 2000). Psychophysical results accompanying such as those used to direct hand-eye coordination or postural
1792 K. STANNEY ET AL.
stability. For example, a viewer is presented with a virtual in XR environments (Rossetti et al., 2005). Body schema
visual object in an XR display, which will be coarser in (unconscious, interactor with the environment) and body
appearance than in the real world because pixels will be image (partially conscious, personal self) are understood to
magnified in the display. This visual object will thus appear be integrally connected via dynamic interactions instead of
different than in the real world because of the magnification hierarchical linkages, which together drive body ownership
and smaller display FOV. Further, the fixed single image (Gallagher, 2005). In healthy persons, embodied object (inan-
plane of the display will affect vergence-accommodation of imate, animate, human) “representations” or cognitive assess-
the eye, thus leading to unnatural blurring of the virtual object ments assist in determining perception and action with
within the visual field. As a result, when a viewer attempts to reference to one’s own body (Reed et al., 2004). Alteration
invoke natural hand-eye coordinated activities with the virtual in perception of such body schema is apparent, for example,
object, the body will need to adapt to the offset world dis- in prism studies where a new representation of visuomotor
played in the headset. All of these offsets (i.e., pixel magnifi- mapping of the hands emerges during adaptation to reversal
cation, vergence-accommodation mismatches, unnatural of the visual field (Sekiyama et al., 2000). An embodied
viewing), not only affect the retina of the eye but also the cognition XR design approach (Weser & Proffitt, 2019) may
brain networks necessary for directed behavior in the real thus better assist with facilitating multiple levels of human
world. The human visual system is thus constantly adapting system adaptation responses and allow for a more symbiotic
and responding to many XR induced consistent and incon- integration with XR technologies (see Table 2).
sistent visual perceptual changes simultaneous to the obser-
ver’s interaction within XR environments. These perceptual ● One class of XR adaptation schemes could be targeted at
changes are occurring quickly and along multiple perception perceptual recalibration and involve highlighting visuo-
channels, such as visual, auditory, and tactile/kinesthetic. motor discordances in order to engender a sense of body
Thus, adaptation “process” outcomes are complex, integrated, ownership and drive sensorimotor adaptation in XR
and brain-based. These effects may also interact with end- environments (i.e., when visuomotor discrepancies
state adaptations, such as hand-eye coordination and postural occur, feedback could be provided that is coincident
stability. It is important to consider integration of eye tracking with the limb indicating an internal error, thereby
into HWDs to effectively capture such adaptive changes in eye engendering perceptual recalibration). While such reca-
point positioning and adjust visual content to support these libration is expected to lead to adverse aftereffects, when
adaptive changes, such as by presenting virtual objects at the sense of embodiment is critical to skill acquisition this
appropriate depth and resolution to support human perfor- approach may be appropriate.
mance (Fidopiastis et al., 2003; Fidopiastis, 2006). This is not
a simple challenge. Current XR designers and developers must In terms of visual-motor skill alterations, research using
be careful not to oversimplify the problem space of human re-adaptation strategies, such as eye-to-hand coordination
adaptation. Thus, while adaptation is a potential mediator to activities post-exposure, suggests that during XR exposure
cybersickness, given the multichannel nature of adaptation, participants undergo visual-motor adaptations that do not
the specific training methods, or exposure protocols required quickly return to baseline skill levels even after short expo-
to drive adaptation within XR are not entirely established for sure durations (c.f. Champney et al., 2007). Given that much
all aspects of the user’s response (Dużmańska et al., 2018). An of the past visual-motor skill alterations related research
opportunity exists to discern a collection of adaptation utilized VR systems (c.f. Bagce et al., 2011), one might
schemes such that the effects and duration of cybersickness conclude that maladaptation issues are pervasive only within
and negative sensory-motor reorganization are lessened fully immersive XR displays. This conclusion is unsupported,
across a wide variety of XR solutions (c.f. Kennedy et al., as AR video and projection HWDs also show evidence of
2000). negative hand-eye coordination aftereffects (Biocca &
Welch and Sampanes (2008) suggested that two types of Rolland, 1998). For example, Condino et al. (2020) demon-
adaptation, perceptual recalibration (i.e., an automatic, strated that persons performing a precision connect-the-dot
restricted process of perceptual learning) and visual-motor task in AR were off by an average 5.9 mm but could not tell
skill alterations (i.e., learning hand and eye-coordinated that they were making such gross hand-eye coordination
movements through a cognitive problem-solving process) errors. These results suggest that visual-motor skill altera-
are distinguishable based upon characteristics and conditions tions also change body perception and attribution of move-
that constitute the XR experience. Visual perceptual recalibra- ment agency. Design strategies may need to account for body
tion occurs when one sensory system (e.g., vision) calibrates perception to allow for a more cooperative adaptation pro-
another (e.g., touch). This type of perceptual learning is cess (see Table 2).
expected to contribute greatly to negative aftereffects, whereas
visual motor skill acquisition occurring during problem- ● A second class of XR adaptation schemes could be targeted
solving tasks that are spatially complex and require more at visual-motor skill alterations and involve using repre-
voluntary movement may not contribute as much to negative sentational feedback that appears to arise from manipula-
aftereffects (Clower & Boussaoud, 2000). tion of the XR environment (i.e., not perceived to be
In terms of perceptual recalibration, adaptation has con- physically coincident with the limb and thus registered as
scious and unconscious components that lend to one’s per- an external error), leading to an indirect mapping strategy
ception and representation of self or body schema as an actor that allows for context-specific adjustments of motor
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1793
responses within the XR environment but minimal adverse In the “rest frame” hypothesis (Prothero & Parker, 2003),
aftereffects. When embodiment is not critical to skill acqui- hypothetical rest frames are accessed via multisensory stimu-
sition, such as in more cognitive, problem-solving tasks, lation; a “visual rest frame,” and “inertial rest frame,” and so
this type of adaptation scheme may be appropriate. on. Hence, conflict between hypothetical rest frames entails
sensory conflict. Finally, Ebenholtz et al. (1994, p. 1034),
A human-centered design cycle that includes these and acknowledged that their “eye movement hypothesis” was clo-
other types of adaptation schemes may help mitigate cyber- sely aligned with sensory conflict hypothesis.
sickness in XR systems. The effectiveness of such adaptation Stoffregen and Riccio (1991), argued that the interpretation
may, however, be XR technology and task dependent and may of any pattern of multisensory input as “conflict” requires
be confounded by exposure duration (Dużmańska et al., comparison with some other pattern that is defined as “non-
2018). Tasks and types of feedback make a difference in conflict.” Patterns of light, sound, and so on carry no intrinsic
adaptation outcomes when the XR environment requires real- metric for “equality” (contra Howard, 1982). Accordingly, the
world actions. Thus, adaptation effects may scale to body definition, or standard, for non-conflict must be internal (e.g.,
schema representations in the brain and only become facil- Oman, 1982). Comparison of current multisensory patterns
itatory once a new brain representation is defined. Providing against internal expectations is problematic because the scien-
a more encompassing perspective of adaptation may guide tist cannot know a person’s history of interactions with the
research and facilitate a better understanding of mechanisms environment and, therefore, cannot know (in quantitative
of cybersickness. Based on this review, important considera- detail) what pattern of multisensory stimulation is expected.
tions to add to the updated R&D agenda include: Thus, while we may quantify patterns of sensory stimulation,
we cannot compute a quantitative estimate of conflict between
● Establish human adaptation schemes in XR applications. current and expected inputs. It follows that sensory conflict
● Integrate eye-tracking into XR devices. hypothesis is not subject to empirical test: It cannot be falsi-
● Determine specific training methods or exposure proto- fied (Ebenholtz et al., 1994; Lackner & Graybiel, 1981;
cols required to drive sensory adaptation within XR Stoffregen & Riccio, 1991).
systems; such as by examining: Sensory conflict hypothesis has struggled to explain com-
○ The feasibility of fostering perceptual recalibration to mon motion sickness phenomena. For example, several stu-
engender a sense of body ownership and drive sen- dies find that motion sickness is more common among
sorimotor adaptation. women than among men. Attempts to account for this effect
○ The feasibility of fostering visual-motor skill altera- (for a review, see Koslucher et al., 2016) have been ad hoc:
tions that lead to an indirect mapping strategy that they have not claimed there are sex-specific levels of sensory
allows for context-specific adjustments of motor conflict. Women and men have similar types of perceptual-
responses. motor interactions with the world. Given this elementary fact,
why should sensory conflict differ between the genders?
In conclusion, the review in this section suggests that, Consider also the common observation that passengers are
while the sensory conflict hypothesis implies that individuals more likely to experience motion sickness than drivers (e.g.,
may be sensitive to sensory cues and this sensitivity may lead Oman, 1982; Reason, 1978). In a yoked control study, Rolnick
to cybersickness, it may be feasible to mitigate this sensitivity and Lubow (1991) found that passengers were more likely
by fostering sensory adaptation. Related implications for than drivers to become sick. As the authors noted, “there is
cybersickness mitigation based on the evolutionary hypothesis no reason to assume that this conflict was absent or reduced
have been summarized in Table 2. in subjects who had control, as compared to no-control sub-
jects” (p. 877). Stoffregen, Chang et al. (2017) asked middle-
aged adults to drive a virtual automobile. Some participants
had decades of experience driving physical vehicles, while
5. Ecological hypothesis: Postural instability and
others had never driven any motor vehicle. If real driving
cybersickness (Stoffregen)
experience gives rise to particular expectations for multisen-
Sensory conflict is hypothesized to arise from discrepancies sory stimulation which match simulated driving, then motion
between the current pattern of multisensory input and the sickness should have differed between drivers and non-
pattern expected on the basis of past interactions with the drivers, but the incidence of motion sickness was not
environment (Oman, 1982; Reason, 1978). The hypothesis observed to differ between drivers and non-drivers. The fact
proposes an antagonistic process in which some inputs are that sensory conflict hypothesis cannot explain either sex
suppressed in favor of others, and in which adaptation con- differences or the driver-passenger effect, both of which
sists of changes in weights (e.g., Gallagher & Ferrè, 2018; have been reported in the literature, calls for consideration
Weech, Varghese, & Barnett-Cowan, 2018). Variants of sen- of alternative theories.
sory conflict hypothesis have been proposed, such as Riccio and Stoffregen (1991, p. 205) hypothesized that, “ …
Treisman’s (1977) poison hypothesis, which argues that per- prolonged postural instability is the cause of motion sickness
ception requires sense-specific spatial reference systems, and symptoms. That is to say, we believe that postural instability
that ingested toxins produce “mismatches between the sys- precedes the symptoms of motion sickness, and that it is
tems” (p. 494). Thus, ingested toxins are seen simply as being necessary to produce symptoms.” Riccio and Stoffregen
a source of sensory conflict. acknowledged that “inputs” from different perceptual systems
1794 K. STANNEY ET AL.
often differ, but they pointed out that these differences need ● For a wide variety of dependent variables, many of
not be interpreted in terms of conflict. They proposed that which are orthogonal. These include the spatial magni-
multisensory non-identities constitute higher-order informa- tude of postural activity (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017;
tion about animal-environment interaction, and that the Stoffregen & Smart, 1998), temporal dynamics (e.g.,
senses work cooperatively (rather than antagonistically) to Stoffregen et al., 2010; Villard et al., 2008), movement
detect this higher-order information. This proposal has rele- multifractality (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017; Koslucher et al.,
vance for motion sickness, but also in terms of general the- 2016), the temporal coupling of postural activity with
ories of perception (Riccio & Stoffregen, 1988; Stoffregen & imposed motion (Walter et al., 2019), and postural
Bardy, 2001; Stoffregen, Mantel et al., 2017; Stoffregen & “time-to-contact” (Li et al., 2018).
Riccio, 1988). The postural instability hypothesis is incompa-
tible with sensory conflict hypothesis in terms of broader Researchers sometimes have mistakenly assumed that the
concepts of information processing upon which the sensory postural instability hypothesis would be supported only if
conflict hypothesis is based (e.g., Chemero, 2011; Gibson, motion sickness was associated with increased spatial magni-
1966; 1979; Pascual-Leone et al., 2005). The postural instabil- tude of postural activity (e.g., Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017;
ity hypothesis shifts the focus in motion sickness research Widdowson et al., 2019); however, Riccio and Stoffregen
away from perceptual inputs and information processing (1991) did not make this prediction. Motion sickness has
and toward the organization and control of movement been preceded by an increase in the spatial magnitude of
(Stoffregen, 2011). postural activity (e.g., Stoffregen & Smart, 1998), or by
The postural instability hypothesis suggests that a postural a decrease in spatial magnitude (e.g., Dennison & D’Zmura,
precursor of motion sickness is a parameter of postural activ- 2017; Stoffregen et al., 2008; Weech et al., 2018). Both results
ity that differs between individuals who (later) report being are consistent with the prediction of the postural instability
well versus sick (e.g., Munafo, Diedrick & Stoffregen, 2017; hypothesis that postural sway will differ between persons who
Stoffregen & Smart, 1998), or which differs as a function of experience motion sickness and those who do not, and that
the severity of subsequent sickness (e.g., Stoffregen et al., such differences will exist before the onset of motion sickness
2013; Weech et al., 2018). Postural precursors of motion symptoms (Stoffregen et al., 2008; Weech et al., 2018).
sickness have been identified in numerous settings, popula- Based on this review, an important consideration to add to
tions, and dependent variables, including: the updated R&D agenda includes:
● Head-mounted displays (Munafo et al., 2017; Arcioni ● Determine what makes an individual susceptible to pos-
et al., 2018; Merhi et al., 2007; Risi & Palmisano, 2019). tural instability during XR use (e.g., vestibular migraine
● Desktop VR technologies (Chang et al., 2017, 2012; susceptibility; Lim et al., 2018).
Chen et al., 2012; Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017; Dong
et al., 2011; Stoffregen et al., 2014, 2008; Stoffregen et al., In summary, Stoffregen and Riccio (1991) have provided
2017; Villard et al., 2008). much evidence in support of the postural instability hypoth-
● Military flight simulators (Stoffregen, Hettinger, Haas, esis, which has been supported by the many studies cited
Roe, & Smart, 2000). above. Based on this review, the design implications for
● In moving rooms (Bonnet et al., 2006; Li et al., 2018; cybersickness mitigation based on the ecological hypothesis
Smart et al., 2002; Stoffregen & Smart, 1998; Stoffregen have been summarized in Table 2.
et al., 2010; Walter et al., 2019).
● On ships at sea (Stoffregen et al., 2013).
6. Multisensory re-weighting and an alternate
● For postural activity during stance (e.g., Bonnet et al., 2006;
approach to cybersickness (Weech)
Stoffregen et al., 2010; Walter et al., 2019) and while seated
(Chen et al., 2012; Dong et al., 2011; Merhi et al., 2007; Weech et al. (2018a) has sought to develop and test
Stoffregen et al., 2000; Stoffregen et al., 2008, 2014). a perspective of cybersickness that focuses on its relationship
● For the “driver-passenger effect”. Postural precursors of to a crucial task of the CNS: accurate estimation and control
motion sickness differ qualitatively between persons of 3D orientation of head-and-body. This process requires as
who do versus do not exert active control of visual input a stream of noisy, multimodal cues and will ideally
motion stimuli. This effect has been demonstrated in produce appropriate behavior as output. A study of cybersick-
virtual vehicles (Dong et al., 2011), and in virtual ambu- ness from this perspective means, first, to assess how indivi-
lation (Chen et al., 2012). Postural precursors of motion dual differences in multimodal information processing might
sickness can differ between individuals who exert differ- relate to discomfort in virtual spaces; and second, to develop
ent types of control over visual motion stimuli interventions that aim to mitigate the damage caused when
(Stoffregen et al., 2014). the CNS experiences a challenge in finding solutions to this
● In pre-adolescent children (Chang et al., 2012), young control task.
adults (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2017; Hardware, software, and user factors play a significant
Stoffregen & Smart, 1998; Walter et al., 2019), and mid- moderating role in the nauseogenicity of XR exposure, and
dle-aged adults (Munafo et al., 2017). what we know about cybersickness etiology has derived par-
● In men and women (Munafo et al., 2017; Koslucher tially from a careful study of the most provocative cases.
et al., 2015, 2016). Nausea is provoked by simulating user-motion in XR by
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1795
moving the viewpoint independently of the head of the user Recently, we have sought evidence about the aspects of
(e.g., applying a “head bob”, passive navigation, or tracking sensorimotor processing that are most predictive of cybersick-
jitter; Palmisano et al., 2007), by adjusting the visual gain of ness proclivity. A set of predictors was collected, including
head movements (Chung & Barnett-Cowan, 2019), or by self-reports of vection strength, vestibular thresholds, and
visual update failure during head motion (Kolasinski & U.S. excursions of the body center-of- pressure from 30 partici-
Army Research Institute For The Behavioral And Social pants. To eliminate collinearity, a principal components
Sciences, 1995). In the Sensory cue conflict and cybersickness regression approach was adopted, which factors out correla-
section above, the role of individual sensitivity to sensory cues tions and computes unique variances for each predictor. The
was discussed, and the impact of miscalibrated visual displays resulting model, which was built using indices derived before
was briefly mentioned in the introduction. The negative exposure to VR, significantly predicted later cybersickness
effects produced in these cases are often causally attributed severity (R2 = 0.37, p =.018). The greatest unique variance in
to the conflict between expected patterns of multimodal input the model was carried by the postural sway during trials
and those generated during these conditions (Oman, 1990; intended to elicit vection (see Figure 6a), and by inspecting
Reason & Brand, 1975; Watt, 1983). Prospective sites of “con- the simple trends, one can see that increased visual motion-
flict detection” identified by monkey neurophysiology include induced postural sway was associated with lower levels of
the vestibular brainstem (Oman & Cullen, 2014), which is cybersickness (r(28) = −0.53, p = .002; Figure 6b; Weech
densely linked to emetic centers of the brain (Yates et al., et al., 2018b). One interpretation of these data is that those
2014). Thus, the sensory conflict hypothesis provides a strong who rapidly re-weight multisensory cues are also those who
model for cybersickness (Oman, 1990), which is supported by
empirical and neurophysiological evidence (Oman & Cullen,
2014; J. Wang & Lewis, 2016), and which has generated
testable predictions about how to tackle the problem
(Cevette et al., 2012; Reed-Jones et al., 2007; Weech et al.,
2018a).
At the same time, the rate at which the cybersickness
problem grows in severity is much faster than the rate of
our scientific progress. The XR user base is orders of magni-
tude greater than a decade ago, and the most recently-
developed XR hardware entirely eclipses even the most expen-
sive hardware from 10 years ago, by which time the bulk of
our field’s research had already been carried out. Here, recent
discoveries and advances in cybersickness research are high-
lighted with the hope of inspiring further research that,
one day, leads to the reliable and universal solution to cyber-
sickness that currently eludes us.
Much of the recent research on cybersickness is informed
by the finding that users often experience a mild form of
inoculation to cybersickness with repeat exposure to XR. In
the Evolutionary Hypothesis section of this paper, it is sug-
gested that the user “learns” to ignore the conflict between
visual and vestibular information (i.e., sensory adaptation) to
which they are exposed over time (Rebenitsch & Owen, 2016;
Watt, 1983). This adaptation has been described as a sensory
re-weighting process, where weights of visual cues are upre-
gulated relative to conflicting vestibular cues (Gallagher &
Ferrè, 2018; Weech et al., 2018a) according to principles of
statistically optimal cue integration (Butler et al., 2010; Fetsch
et al., 2010). In this framework, cues are down-weighted if
they do not contribute to useful estimates of the state of the
world or body; sensations that are high in reliability (such as Figure 6. (a) Principal component (PC) loadings for each predictor*; b) Negative
correlation between postural sway during vection, and cybersickness (ΔCS)
vision) take precedence over noise-rich cues (as in the vestib-
(Adapted from Weech et al., 2018b). * Percentage values on left indicate the
ular modality). An example of the low variance of vision amount of variance in cybersickness scores accounted for by each PC;
compared to vestibular cues can be seen in vection, the visual Percentage values on the bottom indicate the amount of unique variance in
cybersickness scores accounted for by each predictor. Darker colors depict
illusion of self-motion: visual motion dominates perception
higher loadings, representing a greater expression of that factor on the PC.
after a few seconds, resulting in the feeling that one’s body is MSSQ = Motion Sickness Susceptibility Questionnaire score; EOF = Eyes Open
in motion, regardless of the vestibular cues that indicate Foam condition sway path length (SPL); ECF = Eyes Closed Foam condition SPL;
V = Vection condition SPL; EOS = Eyes Open Standard condition SPL; ECS = Eyes
a static head during the initial period of visual surround
Closed Standard condition SPL; VStr = Vection Strength ratings; Thresh =
motion (Weech & Troje, 2017). Vestibular Thresholds.
1796 K. STANNEY ET AL.
are most protected against the provocative conditions of XR processing of multimodal stimuli during presence (Weech
exposure. This account would also suggest that methods of et al., 2019a). Results of a recent study with a large sample
facilitating vection might offer protection from cybersickness of participants (Total N = 170) revealed that building an
in XR. This is a prospect that has been tested in previous enriched narrative context in VR both increases levels of
experiments, and the evidence appears to align with this presence and reduces cybersickness severity (Weech et al.,
suggestion. 2020a). This reduction was greatest for individuals at-risk to
One such piece of evidence comes from procedures that cybersickness, such as those unfamiliar with video games.
“re-couple” multimodal cues, either by physically moving an Other top-down manipulations on cybersickness have
observer along with visual self-motion (Aykent et al., 2014; demonstrated effectiveness in recent years, including findings
Dziuda et al., 2014; Kluver et al., 2015), or by stimulating the that a positive smell (“rose”; Keshavarz et al., 2015) and
vestibular sense with mild current (galvanic vestibular stimu- pleasant-sounding music (Keshavarz & Hecht, 2014; Sang
lation, GVS) to replicate missing acceleration cues (Cevette et al., 2006) can promote moderately better user comfort.
et al., 2012; Gálvez-García et al., 2014; Reed-Jones et al., 2007). Based on these limited findings, a presence consideration
Despite the efficacy of such methods, accurately replicating that was part of the Stanney et al. (1998) R&D agenda and
missing inertial cues is challenging. Based on the premise that an additional consideration to add to the updated R&D
noise modulates the reliability of sensory channels, we exam- agenda include:
ined if adding sensory noise to the vestibular system can guide
self-motion perception away from the zone of discomfort ● Determine relationship between presence, cybersickness,
(conflicting multimodal cues) and toward a resolved percept and adverse physiological aftereffects.
(Weech & Troje, 2017). It was first established if visual dom- ● Determine aspects of sensorimotor processing that are
inance can be facilitated using vestibular noise, which was protective of cybersickness proclivity (e.g., ability to
applied using either stochastic electrical current (noisy GVS) reweight sensory cues rapidly).
or vibration of the mastoid bone (bone-conducted vibration,
BCV). Results indicated a quickening of the vection response Based on these results and the associated review, the design
across the range of circular vection axes when transient ves- implications for cybersickness mitigation based on multisen-
tibular noise was applied, but not for seat vibration or air- sory reweighting have been summarized in Table 2. In sum, it
conducted sound, which supports a vestibular origin for the is clear that we are at an exciting time in cybersickness
effects. research. While much research has been focused on trying
In XR environments, vestibular noise can also modulate to further our understanding of cybersickness from the “sen-
the cybersickness response. Results of a navigation task where sory re-weighting” approach, others have obtained evidence
participants piloted through virtual space with or without for the alternative approaches discussed in each respective
BCV revealed a reduction in sickness severity when BCV hypothesis section above. Far from being a problem, this
was used (Weech et al., 2018a). The time-course of stimula- should be perceived as a healthy diversity of opinion in the
tion was an important factor: For this short-duration experi- cybersickness research field, and as a welcome reminder of the
ment, cybersickness was diminished only when stimulation significant work still to be done before a single unifying
was time-coupled to large visual accelerations. This time- theory of cybersickness is attained.
specificity of cue integration in perceptual decision making
is consistent with recent models (Parise & Ernst, 2016; Wong,
2007). It has also been demonstrated that VR users who are 7. Operational implications of cybersickness:
exposed to tonic noisy GVS over a longer duration (30 min Considerations of a military use case (Dennison and
continuous) demonstrate a reduction of cybersickness (Weech Lawson)
et al., 2020b).
Why should we care about cybersickness? As mentioned in
Emerging evidence reveals the scope for cybersickness
the Introduction, XR technology is expanding into multiple
reduction interventions that target the multisensory cortex.
domains from entertainment to commerce to industry to
Neuroimaging highlights a differential activation of tempor-
military operations. The envisioned applications are endless.
oparietal junction (a major multimodal integration site;
Yet, if cybersickness cannot be resolved, XR could fall far
Blanke, 2012) and occipital areas during cybersickness (Chen
short of its promise and, worse yet, create a divide between
et al., 2010). Although recent evidence shows that trans-
the susceptible and non-susceptible. As Lackner (2014,
cranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to reduce cortical
p. 2495) noted:
excitability over temporoparietal junction is associated with
a reduced severity of cybersickness (Takeuchi et al., 2018),
“ … the range of sensitivity in the general population varies about
more studies are required to confirm these effects (tDCS 10–1, and the adaptation constant also ranges from 10 to 1. By
paradigms have been criticized for non-reproducibility of contrast, the decay time constant varies by 100–1. The import of
late; e.g., Medina & Cason, 2017; Minarik et al., 2016). these values is that susceptibility to motion sickness in the general
population varies by about 10,000–1, a vast range.”
Another cybersickness reduction technique involves the
protective use of “presence,” the sense of “being there” in an The implication of these vast individual differences is that,
XR environment. An increased level of presence has been while some people may be able to fully embrace the power
associated with lower cybersickness, either due to the effects and potential of XR technology, those who are highly suscep-
of the latter on attentional resources, or changes in the tible may be left on the sidelines watching this new era of XR-
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1797
empowered productivity and entertainment pass them by. does not deteriorate immediately, because it could cause ser-
This could have future effects on career opportunities and vice members to avoid using XR training and operational
progression. For example, the military is interested in learning support devices, and because the effects may build or persist
how HWDs can aid Warfighters in performing multiple tasks after exposure, cause the susceptible individual to experience
in parallel and with greater efficiency. Such technologies have distracting sensations (such as fatigue or flashbacks) that
the potential to dramatically change the way that Warfighters could harm subsequent performance of other duties, or curtail
train and fight. In fact, former Secretary of Defense James motivation to keep up with lower-priority but important tasks
Mattis wanted all infantrymen to fight “25 bloodless battles” (Birren, 1949), such as weapons cleaning.
before they ever set foot in a real combat environment. If Despite possible benefits of using XR training and opera-
some service members are not able to tolerate such training, tional support in workforce-related applications within the
this could affect future selection as much as intractable air- military and beyond, the strong likelihood of susceptible indi-
sickness affects pilot selection today. viduals experiencing cybersickness remains a significant con-
Military immersive environments will be employed as part of cern. We would argue that the magnitude of this cybersickness
realistic simulations of meaningful real-world events and opera- problem, and its implications to job performance and career
tions, rather than as ways to introduce an element of entertain- progression, are poorly understood by society in general. This is
ment or fantasy into the user’s experience. For example, while it not only due to problems with existing hardware, which are
is advantageous for military training to be engaging (elevated likely to be resolved, but with a lack of understanding of how
arousal will make training to perform under stress more effec- cybersickness manifests, varies across individuals, and how it
tive), many commonly employed aspects of first-person-shooter may be mitigated. This lack of understanding has resulted in
online gaming (such as respawning, unlimited ability to carry a deemphasizing of the importance of cybersickness research
gear and ammunition, additional cues when a target is acquired, being conducted, and rather a push for cybersickness as being
additional friend/foe cues, limited weapons noise, or recoil) do something users will eventually just adapt to.
not yet apply to most real-world operations and would prove The negative symptoms associated with cybersickness are
deleterious XR features for ensuring transfer of training from most often quantified through surveys and questionnaires,
a game to actual combat. such as the SSQ (Kennedy et al., 1993). Although these meth-
The military applications where XR technologies are most ods are well-validated, they are difficult to administer in
likely to be beneficial include: operational environments where the operator cannot pause
for more than a few seconds, and they require the immersed
● Situations that are expensive to simulate (e.g., major war operator to shift their focus away from their current task. This
games, expensive-to-operate weapons, or platforms). may not only decrease situation awareness within the XR
● Situations that are dangerous to practice in real life (e.g., environment, but also decrease the probability of operational
putting out a shipboard fire). success by adding more cognitive load to the operator. Thus,
● Situations that cannot be properly simulated in tradi- an automated solution to track symptom magnitude without
tional group simulation devices or training centers, user input is needed, such as monitoring of physiological
because they inherently require individually mounted responses or magnitude of head movements.
technology (e.g., due to the necessary squad mobility There is limited research showing the feasibility of training
and distributed operations with other team members modern sensor systems to classify cybersickness symptom
needed to practice the mission). magnitude and onset. Research examining physiological data
● Scenarios where situated learning through embodied have been equivocal (Keshavarz et al., 2014), although some
and contextualized training are beneficial, e.g., training sensors and features, like those associated with respiratory
combat medics/corpsmen to develop a casualty response (Denise et al., 2009; Dennison et al., 2016; Wang & Perry,
plan and administer care (to an actual manikin with 2006), blinking (Kim et al., 2005; Ponder & Kennedy, 1927),
augmented reality injury overlays) while they are sub- cardiovascular (Money & Cheung, 1983; Ohyama et al., 2007),
jected to virtual battlefield stressors. In such situations, and gastrointestinal activity (Dennison et al., 2016), have been
AR (versus VR) will be most applicable. informative in several studies. Critically, the majority of these
● Operational scenarios where Warfighters can afford to analyses examine data in a unimodal fashion, where changes
be completely immersed without the need for extensive in a single sensor system are compared with changes in the
situational awareness of their immediate, real envir- level of reported sickness during the experiment, or more
onment as part of their training (e.g., in a simulated commonly, on the SSQ after the experiment has concluded
Tactical Operations Center, the trainees usually do not and the user has removed themselves from the XR environ-
need to have local views of the neighborhood around the ment (Dennison & D’Zmura, 2017; Dennison et al., 2016,
training center in order to practice their mission). In 2016; Lin et al., 2007). Recent work has demonstrated that
such situations, VR (versus AR) will be most applicable. the analysis and subsequent extraction of meaningful features
from multimodal data can be used to train machine learning
In the military setting, performance contributing to mis- models that classify cybersickness severity over time
sion success is the key outcome variable, rather than other (Dennison et al., 2019). This work has shown that models
considerations such as presence, vection, or cybersickness. trained on multimodal data outperform models constructed
However, if the service member does not feel well during on only features garnered from unimodal sensor data in the
XR immersion, this is concerning even if task performance majority of cases. Such systems may prove useful in
1798 K. STANNEY ET AL.
Table 3. Recommended R&D Agenda to resolve cybersickness (update of Stanney et al., 1998).
Research area Action item Priority Term Progress to date
Basic Determine the various drivers of cybersickness and create 2 M Models are in development concerning visual-vestibular
knowledge a predictive model. conflicts, postural contributors, etc.
Establish means of determining user susceptibility to 2 S-M Potential individual susceptibility predictors are being
cybersickness and aftereffects. explored, such as past susceptibility, heritability, interpupillary
distance, and postural control.
Establish countermeasures to aftereffects. 2 M Research continues on adaptation protocols, medications,
behavioral ways to slow symptom progression (e.g., limiting
head motion requirements), and technological
countermeasures (e.g., earth-referenced display cues.
Identify factors that contribute to how provocative XR content 3 M Some work has been done in this area, highlighting
is, and determine their relative weightings. mismatched IPD, visual-vestibular mismatch, vergence-
accommodation conflict, and other contributing factors.
Establish XR content design guidelines that assist in 3 M Experimentation is still common with respect to software for
mitigating cybersickness. XR. Some guidelines have been offered by leading companies,
but these are already beginning to fall out of date.
Determine feasibility of testing an individual’s sensitivity to 3 M While depth cue sensitivity has been evaluated in the lab, eye
sensory depth cues and determine if such sensitivity is tracking in the headset may make it feasible to integrate such
associated with more severe cybersickness. a metric into XR applications and adapt content accordingly.
Determine which sensory cues, beyond motion parallax, are 3 M Work on sensitivity to motion parallax cues provides early
sickness-inducing. indication of feasibility of evaluation at the sensory cue level.
Establish human adaptation schemes in XR applications. 2 M The time-course of adaptation is little studied apart from
coarse details about single session and multi-session
habituation.
Determine specific training methods or exposure protocols 3 M Some evidence of the appropriate length of exposure and
required to drive sensory adaptation within XR systems. break schedules have been suggested, but these are
preliminary at best.
Determine what makes an individual susceptible to postural 3 M Links between vestibular migraine and postural instability
instability during XR use. have been observed.
Determine relationship between presence, cybersickness, and 4 M Recent literature has revealed a highly intricate relationship
adverse physiological aftereffects. between these factors, and a possible negative correlation
between presence and CS. More needs to be done on
establishing the modulating effects of task parameters on
these factors.
Determine aspects of sensorimotor processing that are 3 M This research is in the early stages, with some evidence of its
protective of cybersickness proclivity (e.g., ability to reweight efficacy.
sensory cues rapidly).
Technology Create wide FOV HWDs that support task performance and 2 S Increases in FOV are inevitable and may reduce or increase
presence but do not elicit cybersickness. cybersickness, depending upon the improvement in
symptoms obtained via greater presence versus worsening of
symptoms with greater visual flow. Technology should
incorporate effective countermeasures and optimal tradeoffs
between FOV, presence, and cybersickness.
Create powerful, lightweight, and untethered AR/VR HWDs. 1 S Devices are much lighter, brighter, and more immersive than
before. Yet, size, weight, and unfamiliarity of current devices
still contribute to the anxiety and disorientation that
commonly underpin user discomfort in XR applications.
A “glasses” form factor will help to reduce this psychological
barrier.
Reduce visual latencies. 1 S While end-to-end latency has been much improved due to
advances in the tracking and rendering pipeline, visual latency
persists.
Create peripheral devices for senses beyond vision and 5 L Sound fidelity has improved markedly and audio based on a
audition. head-related transfer function will be a crucial step. Consumer
haptic/tactile devices are implemented in a basic sense but
scope for improvement remains. Vestibular stimulation is in
a very young but exciting stage of development.
Integrate eye-tracking into XR devices. 2 S Eye tracking will allow user analytics for improved user
experience and UI development, reduced workload, and
improved graphical fidelity through foveated rendering,
possibly reducing vergence accommodation conflict and
oculomotor discomfort.
Evaluation Standardize subjective and objective measurement of 1 S Too many symptom scales are used across labs and objective
aftereffects. indicators lack specificity.
Establish product acceptance criteria and systems 2 S Very few guidelines have been established for XR hardware.
administration protocols to ensure that cybersickness and
aftereffects are minimized.
Develop an understanding of the magnitude of the 1 S While individual differences in cybersickness have been widely
cybersickness problem and its implications to job documented, their implication to mass adoption of XR
performance and career progression. technology have not been carefully examined.
Develop automated solutions to track cybersickness symptom 2 M Real-time physiological data have been adopted in the lab but
magnitude during XR exposure. specificity must be improved and transition to the
marketplace has yet to occur.
(Continued)
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1799
Table 3. (Continued).
Research area Action item Priority Term Progress to date
Applications Identify and evaluate value-added XR applications, both 2 M Current applications are strongly limited in the extent of user
personal and collaborative. interaction. The advent of low-latency internet will allow
major progress on simulated shared-space applications in
coming years.
Develop value-added enterprise XR applications that drive 2 S Several award-winning XR applications have been developed,
mass adoption. and significant financial power has been devoted to this goal.
However, the “value” of XR applications remains too low to
overcome the burden of CS for most prospective users.
Priority (1-high to 5-low).
S = Short term (0–1 year); M = Medium term (within 5 years); L = Long term (> 5 years).
operational environments. Extensive future research is neces- user susceptibility to cybersickness and aftereffects, establish
sary to determine such alternative methods for tracking and countermeasures to aftereffects, establish human adaptation
mitigating the cybersickness issue, and to rule out physiolo- schemes in XR applications, develop an automated solution to
gical changes that are not specific to cybersickness (but merely track cybersickness symptom magnitude during XR exposure,
sensitive to cybersickness, arousal, anxiety, and other states). integrate eye-tracking into XR devices, and establish product
Based on these findings, important considerations to add to acceptance criteria and systems administration protocols to
the updated R&D agenda include: ensure that cybersickness and aftereffects will be minimized.
From a utilitarian perspective, it is also deemed critically
● Develop an understanding of the magnitude of the important (priority 2) to identify and evaluate value-added
cybersickness problem and its implications to job per- XR enterprise applications that drive mass adoption and cre-
formance and career progression. ate collaborative XR systems. It is our hope that if this
● Develop automated solutions to track cybersickness updated cybersickness R&D agenda is carefully carried out,
symptom magnitude during XR exposure. it will render cybersickness a challenge of the past.
Acknowledgements and disclaimers
8. Updated cybersickness R&D agenda
This paper is dedicated to the late Robert S. Kennedy, Ph.D., a world-leading
Expanding interest and growth of XR technology, and its expert in motion sickness and many other topics. His tireless work ethic,
applications to support the 21st century workforce, transform peerless intellect, and selfless mentorship were a gift to all those whose lives
he touched. We would also like to thank Michael Stanney for his assistance
entertainment, and reshape commerce, necessitates an update
with the references. This material is based upon work supported in part by
of the cybersickness R&D agenda presented by Stanney et al.
the U.S. Army Medical Research & Development Command (USAMRDC)
(1998). While progress has been made on action items pre- and the Joint Program Committee - JPC -1 at Fort Detrick, MD under
sented in the 1998 agenda (see Table 3), the current review Contract Number: MTEC-W81XWH1990005, National Science
identifies many challenges left to be resolved and puts forth an Foundation under Award No. CHS-1901423, Facebook Reality, and
Google Daydream. The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this
amended agenda to invest in targeted research to drive toward
publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
resolution of the nettlesome cybersickness problem.
of the Department of Defense and should not be construed as an official
Achieving this goal is paramount; as the world is eagerly Department of the Army, Department of the Navy, Department of Defense,
embracing the potential of XR technology, but it faces the or the United States Government position, policy or decision unless so
daunting challenge of the cybersickness which occurs when designated by other documentation. No official endorsement should be
made. Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or
normal users are exposed to abnormal multisensory stimuli.
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not
Building on the R&D Agenda presented by Stanney et al.
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favor-
(1998), the current review presents cybersickness challenges ing by the U.S. Government. This work was prepared in part by employees
associated with general knowledge, XR technology, evaluation, of the U.S. Government (Drs. Lawson and Dennison) as part of their official
and XR applications that are in need of study. The authors duties. Title 17 U.S.C. §105 provides that ‘Copyright protection under this
title is not available for any work of the United States Government.’ Mention
argue for extensive research (priority 1 – urgent and immedi-
of commercial agencies or products does not imply endorsement by the
ate resolution needed) to create powerful, lightweight, and
authors.
untethered AR/VR HWDs, reduce visual latencies, standar-
dize subjective and objective measurement of aftereffects, with
on-line measurement integrated into HWDs considered ideal, References
and develop an understanding of the magnitude of the cyber-
Arcioni, B., Palmisano, S., Apthorp, D., & Kim, J. (2018). Postural
sickness problem and its implications to job performance and
stability predicts the likelihood of cybersickness in active
career progression. In addition, the following are considered HMD-based virtual reality. Displays, 58, 3–11. https://doi.org/10.
critical research challenges (priority 2 – important to resolve 1016/j.displa.2018.07.001
in the short to medium term): create a wide FOV that sup- Aykent, B., Merienne, F., Guillet, C., Paillot, D., & Kemeny, A. (2014).
Motion sickness evaluation and comparison for a static driving simu-
ports task performance and presence but does not elicit
lator and a dynamic driving simulator. Proceedings of the Institution of
cybersickness, determine the various drivers of cybersickness
Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering, 228
and create a predictive model, establish means of determining (7), 818–829. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954407013516101
1800 K. STANNEY ET AL.
Bagce, H. F., Saleh, S., Adamovich, S. V., & Tunik, E. (2011). Visuomotor Engineering, 67(2), 411–419. https://doi.org/10.1109/tbme.2019.
discordance in virtual reality: Effects on online motor control. 2011 2914517
annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1987). From evolution to behavior:
and biology society, (pp. 7262–7265). Washington, DC: IEEE Evolutionary psychology as the missing link. In J. Dupre (Ed.), The
Computer Society. https://doi.org/10.1109/iembs.2011.6091835. latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality (pp. 277–306).
Biocca, F. A., & Rolland, J. P. (1998). Virtual eyes can rearrange your The MIT Press.
body: Adaptation to visual displacement in see-through, Davis, S., Nesbitt, K., & Nalivaiko, E. (2015, January). Comparing the
head-mounted displays. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual onset of cybersickness using the Oculus Rift and two virtual roller
Environments, 7(3), 262–277. https://doi.org/10.1162/ coasters. Proceedings of the 11th Australasian Conference on
105474698565703 Interactive Entertainment (IE 2015), 167, 3–14. https://crpit.scem.wes
Birren, J. E. (1949). Motion sickness: Its psychophysiological aspects. ternsydney.edu.au/Vol167.html
A survey report on human factors in undersea warfare, (pp. Denise, P., Vouriot, A., Normand, H., Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A.
375–398). Washington, DC: National Research Council. (2009). Effect of temporal relationship between respiration and body
Blanke, O. (2012). Multisensory brain mechanisms of bodily motion on motion sickness. Autonomic Neuroscience, 151(2),
self-consciousness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(8), 556–571. 142–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2009.06.007
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3292 Dennison, M., D’Zmura, M., Harrison, A., Lee, M., & Raglin, A. (2019,
Bonnet, C. T., Faugloire, E., Riley, M. A., Bardy, B. G., & Stoffregen, T. A. May). Improving motion sickness severity classification through
(2006). Motion sickness preceded by unstable displacements of the multi-modal data fusion. In Artificial intelligence and machine learning
center of pressure. Human Movement Science, 25(6), 800–820. https:// for multi-domain operations applications II (Vol. 11006, p. 110060T).
doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2006.03.001 Baltimore, Maryland: International Society for Optics and Photonics.
Bos, J. E. (2011). Nuancing the relationship between motion sickness and Dennison, M. S., & D’Zmura, M. (2017). Cybersickness without the
postural stability. Displays, 32(4), 189–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. wobble: Experimental results speak against postural instability
displa.2010.09.005 theory. Applied Ergonomics, 58, 215–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Bowman, D. A., Koller, D., & Hodges, L. F. (1998). A methodology for apergo.2016.06.014
the evaluation of travel techniques for immersive virtual Dennison, M. S., Wisti, A. Z., & D’Zmura, M. (2016). Use of physiolo-
environments. Virtual Reality, 3(2), 120–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/ gical signals to predict cybersickness. Displays, 44, 42–52. https://doi.
bf01417673 org/10.1016/j.displa.2016.07.002
Butler, J. S., Smith, S. T., Campos, J. L., & Bulthoff, H. H. (2010). Dong, X., Yoshida, K., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2011). Control of a virtual
Bayesian integration of visual and vestibular signals for heading. vehicle influences postural activity and motion sickness. Journal of
Journal of Vision, 10(11), 23. https://doi.org/10.1167/10.11.23 Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(2), 128–138. https://doi.org/10.
Carnegie, K., & Rhee, T. (2015). Reducing visual discomfort with HMDs 1037/a0024097
using dynamic depth of field. IEEE Computer Graphics and Dunn, J. (2017, March 22). Augmented reality will become a $50 billion
Applications, 35(5), 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1109/mcg.2015.98 business in 5 years, analysts say. Business Insider. https://www.busines
Cevette, M. J., Stepanek, J., Cocco, D., Galea, A. M., Pradhan, G. N., sinsider.com/augmented-reality-virtual-reality-sales-idc-chart-2017-3
Wagner, L. S., Oakley, S. R., Smith, B. E., Zapala, D. A., & Dużmańska, N., Strojny, P., & Strojny, A. (2018). Can simulator sickness be
Brookler, K. H. (2012). Oculo-vestibular recoupling using galvanic ves- avoided? A review on temporal aspects of simulator sickness. Frontiers in
tibular stimulation to mitigate simulator sickness. Aviation, Space, and Psychology, 9(2132). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02132
Environmental Medicine, 83(6), 549–555. https://doi.org/10.3357/asem. Dziuda, Ł., Biernacki, M. P., Baran, P. M., & Truszczyński, O. E. (2014). The
3239.2012 effects of simulated fog and motion on simulator sickness in a driving
Champney, R., Stanney, K. M., Hash, P., Malone, L., Kennedy, R. S., & simulator and the duration of after-effects. Applied Ergonomics, 45(3),
Compton, D. (2007). Recovery from virtual environment exposure: 406–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2013.05.003
Expected time-course of symptoms and potential readaptation Ebenholtz, S. M., Cohen, M. M., & Linder, B. J. (1994). The possible role
mechanisms. Human Factors, 49(3), 491–506. of nystagmus in motion sickness: A hypothesis. Aviation, Space, &
Chang, C.-H., Chen, F.-C., Kung, W.-C., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2017). Effects Environmental Medicine, 65(11), 1032–1035.
of physical driving experience on body movement and motion sickness Fernandes, A. S., & Feiner, S. K. (2016). Combating VR sickness through
during virtual driving. Aerospace Medicine and Human Performance, 88 subtle dynamic field-of-view modification. IEEE symposium on 3D
(11), 985–992. https://doi.org/10.3357/amhp.4893.2017 user interfaces 201-210. Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society.
Chang, C.-H., Pan, -W.-W., Tseng, L.-Y., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2012). Fetsch, C. R., DeAngelis, G. C., & Angelaki, D. E. (2010). Visual-
Postural activity and motion sickness during video game play in vestibular cue integration for heading perception: Applications of
children and adults. Experimental Brain Research, 217(2), 299–309. optimal cue integration theory. European Journal of Neuroscience, 31
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-011-2993-4 (10), 1721–1729. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07207
Chemero, A. (2011). Radical embodied cognitive science. MIT Press. Fidopiastis, C. M., Meyer, C., Fuhrman, K., & Rolland, J. P. (2003).
Chen, Y.-C., Dong, X., Chen, F.-C., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2012). Control of Quantitative assessment of visual acuity in projection head-mounted
a virtual avatar influences postural activity and motion sickness. displays. In C. E. Rash & E. R. Colin (Eds.), Proceedings of the SPIE
Ecological Psychology, 24(4), 279–299. https://doi.org/10.1080/ Aerosense: Helmet- and Head-Mounted Displays VIII: Technologies and
10407413.2012.726181 Applications, (vol. 7, pp. 399–406). https://doi.org/10.1117/12.486377
Chen, Y.-C., Duann, J.-R., Chuang, S.-W., Lin, C.-L., Ko, L.-W., Jung, T.- Fidopiastis, C. M. (2006). User-centered virtual environment assessment
P., & Lin, C.-T. (2010). Spatial and temporal EEG dynamics of motion and design for cognitive rehabilitation applications. [Unpublished doc-
sickness. NeuroImage, 49(3), 2862–2870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu toral dissertation]. University of Central Florida.
roimage.2009.10.005 Fidopiastis, C. M., Rizzo, A. A., & Rolland, J. P. (2010). User-centered
Chung, W., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2019). Perceived timing of passive virtual environment design for virtual rehabilitation. Journal of
self-motion relative to auditory stimuli with and without vision. NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 7(1), 11. https://doi.org/10.
Journal of Vision, 19(10), 301b. https://doi.org/10.1167/19.10.301b 1186/1743-0003-7-11
Clower, D. M., & Boussaoud, D. (2000). Selective use of perceptual recali- Fulvio, J. M., Ji, M., & Rokers, B. (2020). Variation in visual sensitivity predicts
bration versus visuomotor skill acquisition. Journal of Neurophysiology, motion sickness in virtual reality. bioRxiv 488817. https://doi.org/10.1101/
84(5), 2703–2708. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.84.5.2703 488817
Condino, S., Carbone, M., Piazza, R., Ferrari, M., & Ferrari, V. (2020). Gallagher, M., & Ferrè, E. R. (2018). Cybersickness: A multisensory
Perceptual limits of optical see-through visors for augmented reality integration perspective. Multisensory Research, 31(7), 645–674.
guidance of manual tasks. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical https://doi.org/10.1163/22134808-20181293
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1801
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford University visually induced motion sickness. Experimental Brain Research, 234
Press. (1), 313–322. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-015-4462-y
Gálvez-García, G., Hay, M., & Gabaude, C. (2014). Alleviating simulator Koslucher, F., Munafo, J., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2016). Postural sway in
sickness with galvanic cutaneous stimulation. Human Factors, 57(4), men and women during nauseogenic motion of the illuminated
649–657. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720814554948 environment. Experimental Brain Research, 234(9), 2709–2720.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4675-8
Greenwood Press. Kruijff, E., Swan, J. E., II, & Feiner, S. (2010). Perceptual issues in
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: augmented reality revisited. The IEEE international symposium on
Houghton Mifflin. mixed and augmented reality (ISMAR 2010) 3–12. Washington, DC:
Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A. (2005). Motion sickness. Current Opinion IEEE Computer Society.
in Neurology, 18(1), 29–34. https://doi.org/10.1097/00019052- Kuiper, O. X., Bos, J. E., Diels, C., & Cammaerts, K. (2019). Moving base
200502000-00007 driving simulators’ potential for carsickness research. Applied
Graybiel, A., & Knepton, J. (1976). Sopite syndrome: A sometimes sole Ergonomics, 81, 102889. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2019.102889
manifestation of motion sickness. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Lackner, J. R. (2014). Motion sickness: More than nausea and vomiting.
Medicine, 47(8), 873–882. Experimental Brain Research, 232(8), 2493–2510. https://doi.org/10.
Gruen, R., Ofek, E., Steed, A., Gal, R., Sinclair, M., & Gonzalez-Franco, 1007/s00221-014-4008-8
M. (2020). Measuring system visual latency through cognitive latency Lackner, J. R., & Graybiel, A. (1981). Variations in gravtoinertial force
on video see-through AR devices. 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual level affect the gain of the vestibulo-ocular reflex: Implications for the
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), 791–799. https://doi.org/10.1109/ etiology of space motion sickness. Aviation, Space, & Environmental
vr46266.2020.1580498468656 Medicine, 52(3), 154–158.
Hale, K. S., & Stanney, K. M. (Eds.). (2014). Handbook of virtual envir- Lawson, B. D. (2014). Motion sickness symptomatology and origins. In
onments: Design, implementation, and applications (2nd edition). CRC K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments:
Press. Design, implementation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 531–600). CRC
Howard, I. P. (1982). Human visual orientation. John Wiley & Sons. Press.
Hughes, C. L., Fidopiastis, C. M., Stanney, K. M., Bailey, P. S., Ruiz, E., Lawson, B. D., & Riecke, B. E. (2014). The perception of body motion. In
Frye, D. L., & Karluk, F. J. (2020, under review). Cybersickness profile K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments:
associated with long-duration AR exposure. Frontiers in Virtual Reality. Design, implementation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 163–196). CRC
IDC. (2020, March 18). AR and VR headsets will see shipments decline in Press.
the near term due to COVID-19, but long-term outlook is positive, Li, R., Walter, H., Curry, C., Rath, R., Peterson, N., & Stoffregen, T. A.
according to IDC. The Premier Global Market Intelligence Company. (2018). Postural time-to-contact as a precursor of visually induced
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS46143720 motion sickness. Experimental Brain Research, 236(6), 1631–1641.
Kennedy, R. S., Lane, N. E., Berbaum, K. S., & Lilienthal, M. G. (1993). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-018-5246-y
Simulator sickness questionnaire: An enhanced method for quantifying Lim, Y.-H., Kim, J.-S., Lee, H.-W., & Kim, S.-H. (2018). Postural instabil-
simulator sickness. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3(3), ity induced by visual motion stimuli in patients with vestibular
203–220. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327108ijap0303_3 migraine. Frontiers in Neurology, 9(443). https://doi.org/10.3389/
Kennedy, R. S., Stanney, K. M., & Dunlap, W. P. (2000). Duration and fneur.2018.00433
exposure to virtual environments: Sickness curves during and across Lin, C. T., Chuang, S. W., Chen, Y. C., Ko, L. W., Liang, S.-F., & Jung, T.-
sessions. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 9(5), P. (2007). EEG effects of motion sickness induced in a dynamic virtual
463–472. https://doi.org/10.1162/105474600566952 reality environment. Proceedings of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
Keshavarz, B., Hecht, H., & Lawson, B. D. (2014). Visually-induced motion and Biological Society, 2, 3872–3875. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.
sickness: Causes, characteristics, and countermeasures. In K. S. Hale & 2007.4353178
K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments: Design, imple- Lin, J. J.-W., Duh, H. B. L., Parker, D. E., Abi-Rached, H., & Furness, T. A.
mentation, and applications (2nd ed., pp. 647–698). CRC Press. (2002). Effects of field of view on presence, enjoyment, memory, and
Keshavarz, B., & Hecht, H. (2014). Pleasant music as a countermeasure simulator sickness in a virtual environment. Proceedings IEEE Virtual
against visually induced motion sickness. Applied Ergonomics, 45(3), Reality (pp. 164–171). https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2002.996519
521–527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2013.07.009 Linden, A., & Fenn, J. (2003). Understanding Gartner’s hype cycles
Keshavarz, B., Stelzmann, D., Paillard, A., & Hecht, H. (2015). Visually (Strategic Analysis Report Nº R-20-1971). Gartner, Inc, pp. 88.
induced motion sickness can be alleviated by pleasant odors. Lubeck, A. J., Bos, J. E., & Stins, J. F. (2015). Motion in images is essential
Experimental Brain Research, 233(5), 1353–1364. https://doi.org/10. to cause motion sickness symptoms, but not to increase postural sway.
1007/s00221-015-4209-9 Displays, 38, 55–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2015.03.001
Kim, Y. Y., Kim, H. J., Kim, E. N., Ko, H. D., & Kim, H. T. (2005). McCauley, M. E., & Sharkey, T. J. (1992). Cybersickness: Perception of
Characteristic changes in the physiological components of self-motion in virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
cybersickness. Psychophysiology, 42(5), 616–625. https://doi.org/10. Environments, 1(3), 311–318. https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1992.1.3.311
1111/j.1469-8986.2005.00349.x Medina, J., & Cason, S. (2017). No evidential value in samples of
Kitazaki, M. (2013). Effects of retinal position on the visuo-motor adap- transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) studies of cognition
tation of visual stability in a virtual environment. I-Perception, 4(4), and working memory in healthy populations. Cortex, 94, 131–141.
242–252. https://doi.org/10.1068/i0534 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.06.021
Klüver, M., Herrigel, C., Preuß, S., Schöner, H. P., & Hecht, H. (2015). Merhi, O., Faugloire, E., Flanagan, M., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2007). Motion
Comparing the incidence of simulator sickness in five different driv- sickness, console video games, and head-mounted displays. Human
ing simulators. In Proceedings of driving simulation conference. Factors, 49(5), 920–934. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872007x230262
Tübingen, Germany. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Malte_ Middleton, V. E., O’Keefe, J., & McIntyre, R. T. (1993). Virtual reality
Kluever/publication/279950289_Comparing_the_Incidence_of_ and analytical simulation of the soldier. Proceedings of 1993 winter
Simulator_Sickness_in_Five_Different_Driving_Simulators/links/ simulation conference-(WSC’93) 1048–1052. Washington, DC: IEEE
5655905c08ae4988a7b0b731/Comparing-the-Incidence-of-Simulator- Computer Society.
Sickness-in-Five-Different-Driving-Simulators.pdf Minarik, T., Berger, B., Althaus, L., Bader, V., Biebl, B., Brotzeller, F.,
Kolasinski, E. M., & U.S. Army Research Institute For The Behavioral Leitner, M., Jesteadt, L., Kalweit, L., Leitner, M., Linke, F.,
And Social Sciences. (1995). Simulator sickness in virtual environments Nabielska, N., Reiter, T., Schmitt, D., Spraetz, A., Sauseng, P., &
(No. ARI-TR-1027). Fusban, T. (2016). The importance of sample size for reproducibility
Koslucher, F., Haaland, E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2015). Sex differences in of tDCS effects. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10(453). https://doi.
visual performance and postural sway precede sex differences in org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00453
1802 K. STANNEY ET AL.
Money, K. E. (1990). Motion sickness and evolution. In G. H. Crampton syndrome? Proceedings of the 4th International Driving Symposium
(Ed.), Motion and Space Sickness (pp. 1–8). CRC Press. on Human Factors in Driver Assessment Training and Vehicle Design,
Money, K. E., & Cheung, B. S. (1983). Another function of the inner ear: 534–540. https://doi.org/10.17077/drivingassessment.1288
Facilitation of the emetic response to poisons. Aviation, Space, & Riccio, G. E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (1988). Affordances as constraints on
Environmental Medicine, 54(3), 208–211. the control of stance. Human Movement Science, 7(2–4), 265–300.
Moss, J. D., & Muth, E. R. (2011). Characteristics of head-mounted https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-9457(88)90014-0
displays and their effects on simulator sickness. Human Factors, 53 Riccio, G. E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (1991). An ecological theory of motion
(3), 308–319. sickness and postural instability. Ecological Psychology, 3(3), 195–240.
Munafo, J., Diedrick, M., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2017). The virtual reality https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0303_2
head-mounted display Oculus Rift induces motion sickness and is Risi, D., & Palmisano, S. (2019). Effects of postural stability, active control,
sexist in its effects. Experimental Brain Research, 235, 889–901. exposure duration and repeated exposures on HMD induced
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-016-4846-7 cybersickness. Displays, 60, 9–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2019.08.
Ohyama, S., Nishiike, S., Watanabe, H., Matsuoka, K., Akizuki, H., 003
Takeda, N., & Harada, T. (2007). Autonomic responses during motion Rolnick, A., & Lubow, R. E. (1991). Why is the driver rarely motion sick?
sickness induced by virtual reality. Auris Nasus Larynx, 34(3), The role of controllability in motion sickness. Ergonomics, 34(7),
303–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2007.01.002 867–879. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139108964831
Oman, C. M. (1982). A heuristic mathematical model for the dynamics Rossetti, Y., Rode, G., Farnè, A., & Rossetti, A. (2005). Implicit body
of sensory conflict and motion sickness hearing in classical musicians. representations in action. Advances In Consciousness Research, 62,
Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 94(sup392), 4–44. https://doi.org/10.3109/ 111–125. https://doi.org/10.1075/aicr.62.08ros
00016488209108197 Sang, F. D. Y. P., Billar, J. P., Golding, J. F., & Gresty, M. A.
Oman, C. M. (1990). Motion sickness: A synthesis and evaluation of the (2006). Behavioral methods of alleviating motion sickness:
sensory conflict theory. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Effectiveness of controlled breathing and a music audiotape.
Pharmacology, 68(2), 294–303. https://doi.org/10.1139/y90-044 Journal of Travel Medicine, 10(2), 108–111. https://doi.org/10.
Oman, C. M. (1998). Sensory conflict theory and space sickness: Our 2310/7060.2003.31768
changing perspective. Journal of Vestibular Research, 8(1), 51–56. Sekiyama, K., Miyauchi, S., Imaruoka, T., Egusa, H., & Tashiro, T.
https://doi.org/10.3233/ves-1998-8107 (2000). Body image as a visuomotor transformation device revealed
Oman, C. M. (2012). Are evolutionary hypotheses for motion sickness in adaptation to reversed vision. Nature, 407(6802), 374–377. https://
“just-so” stories? Journal of Vestibular Research, 22(2,3), 117–127. doi.org/10.1038/35030096
https://doi.org/10.3233/ves-2011-0432 Serge, S. R., & Moss, J. D. (2015). Simulator sickness and the Oculus
Oman, C. M., & Cullen, K. E. (2014). Brainstem processing of vestibular Rift. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
sensory exafference: Implications for motion sickness etiology. Annual Meeting, 59(1), 761–765. https://doi.org/10.1177/
Experimental Brain Research, 232(8), 2483–2492. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 1541931215591236
s00221-014-3973-2 Smart, L. J., Stoffregen, T. A., & Bardy, B. G. (2002). Visually induced
Palmisano, S., Bonato, F., Bubka, A., & Folder, J. (2007). Vertical display motion sickness predicted by postural instability. Human Factors, 44
oscillation effects on forward vection and simulator sickness. Aviation, (3), 451–465. https://doi.org/10.1518/0018720024497745
Space, and Environmental Medicine, 78(10), 951–956. https://doi.org/ Stanney, K., Fidopiastis, C., & Foster, L. (2020). Virtual reality is sexist:
10.3357/asem.2079.2007 But it does not have to be. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 7(4). https://
Parise, C. V., & Ernst, M. O. (2016). Correlation detection as a general doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2020.00004
mechanism for multisensory integration. Nature Communications, 7 Stanney, K., Salvendy, G., Deisinger, J., DiZio, P., Ellis, S.,
(1), 11543. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11543 Ellison, J., … Witmer, B. (1998). Aftereffects and sense of pre-
Pascual-Leone, A., Amedi, A., Fregni, F., & Merabet, L. B. (2005). The sence in virtual environments: Formulation of a research and
plastic human brain cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28, 377– development agenda. International Journal of Human-Computer
401. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144216 Interaction, 10(2), 135–187. https://doi.org/10.1207/
Petrock, V. (2020, April 7). US virtual and augmented reality users 2020. s15327590ijhc1002_3
eMarketer. https://www.emarketer.com/content/us-virtual-and- Stanney, K. M., Kennedy, R. S., & Hale, K. S. (2014). Virtual environ-
augmented-reality-users-2020. ments usage protocols. In K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.),
Pettijohn, K. A., Geyer, D., Gomez, J., Becker, W. J., & Biggs, A. T. (2018). Handbook of Virtual Environments: Design, Implementation, and
Postural instability and simulator seasickness. Aerospace Medicine and Applications (2nd ed., pp. 797–809). CRC Press.
Human Performance, 89(7), 634–641. https://doi.org/10.3357/amhp.4998. Stanney, K. M., Nye, H., Haddad, S., Padron, C. K., Hale, K. S., &
2018 Cohn, J. V. (2020, in press). eXtended reality (XR) environments. In
Ponder, E., & Kennedy, W. P. (1927). On the act of blinking. Quarterly G. Salvendy & W. Karwowski (Eds.), Handbook of human factors and
Journal of Experimental Physiology, 18(2), 89–110. https://doi.org/10. ergonomics. (5th) ed. John Wiley & Sons.
1113/expphysiol.1927.sp000433 Stanney, K. M., Hale, K. S., Nahmens, I., & Kennedy, R. S. (2003). What
Prothero, J. D., & Parker, D. E. (2003). A unified approach to presence and to expect from immersive virtual environment exposure: Influences of
motion sickness. In L. J. Hettinger & M. W. Haas (Eds.), Virtual and gender, body mass index, and past experience. Human Factors, 45(3),
adaptive environments: Applications, Implications, and Human 504–520. https://doi.org/10.1518/hfes.45.3.504.27254
Performance Issues (pp. 47–66). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Stanney, K. M., & Kennedy, R. S. (1998). Aftereffects from virtual
Reason, J. T. (1978). Motion sickness adaptation: A neural mismatch environment exposure: How long do they last? Proceedings of the
model. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 71(11), 819–829. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 42(21),
https://doi.org/10.1177/014107687807101109 1476–1480. https://doi.org/10.1177/154193129804202103
Reason, J. T., & Brand, J. J. (1975). Motion sickness. Academic Press. Stanney, K. M., Kennedy, R. S., Drexler, J. M., & Harm, D. L. (1999).
Rebenitsch, L., & Owen, C. (2016). Review on cybersickness in applica- Motion sickness and proprioceptive aftereffects following virtual
tions and visual displays. Virtual Reality, 20(2), 101–125. https://doi. environment exposure. Applied Ergonomics, 30(1), 27–38. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10055-016-0285-9 org/10.1016/s0003-6870(98)00039-8
Reed, C., McGoldrick, J., Shackelford, J. R., & Fidopiastis, C. (2004). Are Stoffregen, T. A. (2011). Motion sickness considered as a movement
human bodies represented differently from other objects? Experience disorder. Movement & Sport Sciences, 74(3), 19. https://doi.org/10.
shapes object representations. Visual Cognition, 11(4), 523–550. 3917/sm.074.0019
https://doi.org/10.1080/13506280344000428 Stoffregen, T. A., & Bardy, B. G. (2001). On specification and the senses.
Reed-Jones, R. J., Reed-Jones, J. G., Trick, L. M., & Vallis, L. A. (2007). Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(2), 195–213. https://doi.org/10.
Can galvanic vestibular stimulation reduce simulator adaptation 1017/s0140525x01003946
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 1803
Stoffregen, T. A., Chang, C.-H., Chen, F.-C., & Zeng, W.-J. (2017). Journal of Neurophysiology, 116(4), 1586–1591. https://doi.org/10.
Effects of decades of physical driving on body movement and motion 1152/jn.00345.2016
sickness during virtual driving. Plos One, 12(11), e0187120. https:// Wang, X., & Perry, A. C. (2006). Metabolic and physiologic responses to video
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187120 game play in 7- to 10-year-old boys. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
Stoffregen, T. A., Chen, F.-C., Varlet, M., Alcantara, C., & Bardy, B. G. Medicine, 160(4), 411. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.160.4.411
(2013). Getting your sea legs. PLoS ONE, 8(6), e66949. https://doi.org/ Watt, D. G. D. (1983). Sensory and motor conflict in motion sickness.
10.1371/journal.pone.0066949 Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 23(1–2), 32–35. https://doi.org/10.
Stoffregen, T. A., Chen, Y.-C., & Koslucher, F. C. (2014). Motion control, 1159/000121485
motion sickness, and the postural dynamics of mobile devices. Webster, M. A. (2015). Visual adaptation. Annual Review of Vision
Experimental Brain Research, 232(4), 1389–1397. https://doi.org/10. Science, 1(1), 547–567. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-vision
1007/s00221-014-3859-3 -082114-035509
Stoffregen, T. A., Faugloire, E., Yoshida, K., Flanagan, M. B., & Merhi, O. Weech, S., Kenny, S., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2019). Presence and cyber-
(2008). Motion sickness and postural sway in console video games. sickness in virtual reality are negatively related: A review. Frontiers in
Human Factors, 50(2), 322–331. https://doi.org/10.1518/ Psychology, 10(158). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00158
001872008x250755 Weech, S., Kenny, S., Lenizky, M., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2020a).
Stoffregen, T. A., Hettinger, L. J., Haas, M. W., Roe, M. M., & Smart, L. J. Narrative and gaming experience interact to affect presence
(2000). Postural instability and motion sickness in a fixed-base flight and cybersickness in virtual reality. International Journal of
simulator. Human Factors, 42(3) 458–469. https://doi.org/10.1518/ Human-Computer Studies, 138, 102398. https://doi.org/10.
001872000779698097 1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102398
Stoffregen, T. A., Mantel, B., & Bardy, B. G. (2017). The senses consid- Weech, S., Moon, J., & Troje, N. F. (2018a). Influence of bone-conducted
ered as one perceptual system. Ecological Psychology, 29(3), 165–197. vibration on simulator sickness in virtual reality. Plos One, 13(3),
https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.2017.1331116 e0194137. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0194137
Stoffregen, T. A., & Riccio, G. E. (1988). An ecological theory of orienta- Weech, S., & Troje, N. F. (2017). Vection latency is reduced by
tion and the vestibular system. Psychological Review, 95(1), 3–14. bone-conducted vibration and noisy galvanic vestibular stimulation.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.95.1.3 Multisensory Research, 30(1), 65–90. https://doi.org/10.1163/22134808-
Stoffregen, T. A., & Riccio, G. E. (1991). An ecological critique of the 00002545
sensory conflict theory of motion sickness. Ecological Psychology, 3(3), Weech, S., Varghese, J. P., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2018). Estimating the
159–194. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0303_1 sensorimotor components of cybersickness. Journal of Neurophysiology,
Stoffregen, T. A., & Smart, L. J. (1998). Postural instability precedes 120(5), 2201–2217.
motion sickness. Brain Research Bulletin, 47(5), 437–448. https://doi. Weech, S., Varghese, J. P., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2018b). Estimating the
org/10.1016/s0361-9230(98)00102-6 sensorimotor components of cybersickness. Journal of Neurophysiology,
Stoffregen, T. A., Yoshida, K., Villard, S., Scibora, L., & Bardy, B. G. 120(5), 2201–2217. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00477.2018
(2010). Stance width influences postural stability and motion sickness. Weech, S., Wall, T., & Barnett-Cowan, M. (2020b). Reduction of cyber-
Ecological Psychology, 22(3), 169–191. https://doi.org/10.1080/ sickness during and immediately following noisy galvanic vestibular
10407413.2010.496645 stimulation. Experimental Brain Research, 238(2), 427–437. https://
Stone, W.B. (2017). Psychometric evaluation of the Simulator Sickness doi.org/10.1007/s00221-019-05718-5
Questionnaire as a measure of cybersickness. [Unpublished doctoral dis- Welch, R. B. (1978). Perceptual modification : Adapting to altered sensory
sertation]. Iowa State University. https://doi.org/10.31274/etd-180810- environments. Academic Press.
5050 Welch, R. B. (1986). Adaptation of space perception. In K. R. Boff,
Takeuchi, N., Mori, T., Suzukamo, Y., & Izumi, S.-I. (2018). Modulation L. Kaufman, & J. P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of perception and
of excitability in the temporoparietal junction relieves virtual reality human performance (pp. 24). John Wiley and Sons.
sickness. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 21(6), Welch, R. B., & Mohler, B. J. (2014). Adapting to virtual environments. In
381–387. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2017.0499 K. S. Hale & K. M. Stanney (Eds.), Handbook of virtual environments:
Treisman, M. (1977). Motion sickness: An evolutionary hypothesis. Design, implementation, and applications (pp. 627–646). CRC Press.
Science, 197(4302), 493–495. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.301659 Welch, R. B., & Sampanes, A. C. (2008). Adapting to virtual environ-
Villard, S. J., Flanagan, M. B., Albanese, G. M., & Stoffregen, T. A. ments: Visual-motor skill acquisition versus perceptual recalibration.
(2008). Postural instability and motion sickness in a virtual moving Displays, 29(2), 152–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2007.09.013
room. Human Factors, 50(2), 332–345. https://doi.org/10.1518/ Weser, V., & Proffitt, D. R. (2019). Tool embodiment: The tool’s output
001872008x250728 must match the user’s input. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 12
Vovk, A., Wild, F., Guest, W., & Kuula, T. (2018). Simulator sickness in (537). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2018.00537
augmented reality training using the Microsoft HoloLens. In Widdowson, C., Becerra, I., Merrill, C., Wang, R. F., & LaValle, S.
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in (2019). Assessing postural instability and cybersickness through
Computing Systems (pp. 1–9). Montreal QC Canada. https://doi.org/ linear and angular displacement. Human Factors,
10.1145/3173574.3173783 001872081988125. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819881254
Wada, T., Konno, H., Fujisawa, S., & Doi, S. (2012). Can passengers’ Wong, K.-F. (2007). Neural circuit dynamics underlying accumulation of
active head tilt decrease the severity of carsickness? Human Factors, 54 time-varying evidence during perceptual decision making. Frontiers in
(2), 226–234. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720812436584 Computational Neuroscience, 1(6). https://doi.org/10.3389/neuro.10.006.
Walter, H. J., Li, R., Munafo, J., Curry, C., Peterson, N., & Stoffregen, T. A. 2007
(2019). Unstable coupling of body sway with imposed motion precedes Yates, B. J., Catanzaro, M. F., Miller, D. J., & McCall, A. A. (2014).
visually induced motion sickness. Human Movement Science, 64, 389–397. Integration of vestibular and emetic gastrointestinal signals that pro-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2019.03.006 duce nausea and vomiting: Potential contributions to motion sickness.
Wang, J., & Lewis, R. F. (2016). Contribution of intravestibular sensory Experimental Brain Research, 232(8), 2455–2469. https://doi.org/10.
conflict to motion sickness and dizziness in migraine disorders. 1007/s00221-014-3937-6
