
Cybersickness can linger long after XR exposure and compro -
mise postural stability, hand-eye coordination, visual functioning, 
and general well-being. These aftereffects generally result from the 
individual’s sensorimotor adaptation to the immersive experience, 
which is a natural and automatic response to an intersensorily 
imperfect virtual experience and is elicited (and often resolved) by 
the plasticity of the human nervous system, which recalibrates 
continuously to new inputs (Stanney et al., 1998 ). It is speculated 
that the problem is less severe in AR, as compared to VR, but that 
assumption has yet to be fully validated.
To discuss potential solutions for cybersickness, a special ses-
sion was held at the 1997 Human Computer Interaction (HCI) 
International Conference . As a result of that (largely NASA- 
sponsored) session, a research and development (R&D) agenda 
was formulated (Stanney et al., 1998 ). High priority recommenda -
tions included developing an understanding of the role of sensory 
discordance, employing human adaptation schedules, developing 
and implementing design guidelines to minimize sensory con-
flicts, developing standardized subjective and objective measures 
of aftereffects to quantify the problem, establishing countermea -
sures to sensory cue conflicts, and improving head tracking tech-
nology and system response latency. Since that session, significant 
advances have been made in our understanding of the causes 
underlying cybersickness and technology facilitating XR applica -
tions. To evaluate progress since the 1997 special session, assess the 
current state of the field, and identify future challenges, 
a workshop entitled Cybersickness: Causes and Solutions was con-
vened in Los Angeles CA, at the SIGGRAPH 2019 conference 
(Special Interest Group on Computer GRAPHics and Interactive 
Techniques ). This paper engages the participants from that work -
shop in formulating an updated R&D agenda, three of whom 
participated in the development of the original 1998 agenda.
2.Consolidation of the literature (Lawson and 
Stanney)
2.1. Cybersickness revisited: The rationale for this paper
Immersive technologies, such as virtual and augmented reality, 
initially failed to live up to inflated expectations. They have since 
improved greatly, traveling along the popular (but hypothetical) 
Gartner Hype Cycle of innovation (Linden & Fenn, 2003 ) and 
emerging from the “trough of disillusionment” (p. 2), which con-
tributed to waning interest in the 1990s. These immersive tech-
nologies appear to be nearing the “plateau of productivity” (p. 2), 
with mainstream adoption on the horizon. Unfortunately, cyber -
sickness (a type of motion sickness associated with prolonged 
immersion) remains as a common user problem that stands in 
the way. Stanney et al. (1998 ) described key cybersickness-related 
R&D problems that would need to be solved before VR technology 
could live up to its potential and achieve mass adoption. This paper 
garnered much interest, but is due for an update, as VR and AR 
systems are now commercially available that are of acceptable quality and are more affordable than some smartphones today. 
In fact, the time has finally come when tens of millions of XR 
headsets have been sold worldwide, but mentions of unpleasant 
symptoms are emerging again in the news and are regularly 
discussed on blog posts. Therefore, it is appropriate to revisit the 
cybersickness problems discussed by Stanney et al. (1998 ) and to 
identify any needed modifications to the recommended R&D 
agenda.
2.2. Are we seeing the rebirth of XR now or merely 
another hype cycle?
The original Stanney et al. (1998 ) paper cited a prediction that 
VR would be widespread by approximately 2008. It appears 
that true dissemination did not begin until nearly a decade 
later than predicted, but it is now fully underway. The evi-
dence that XR is undergoing a revival derives from Google 
Trends searches, unit sales statistics, and research publication 
trends, which are described below.
Google Trends searches reveal that VR interest did not rise 
steeply until the mid-2010s (see Figure 1a screen captures 
from trends.google.com ). Interest rose quickly following the 
2013 introduction of the earliest developer version of the 
Oculus Rift. For the first time, users had access to VR of 
acceptable quality for under 500 USD which created 
a tipping point for sales, with several competitor VR headsets 
marketed shortly thereafter. Interest in AR was already sur-
ging at that time and has remained strong (see Figure 1b), 
while interest in VR has waned a bit in recent years, perhaps 
because of consistent reports of cybersickness, and the need to 
completely remove a user from real-world viewing. This is 
reflected in the latest headset usage estimates, with 
52.1 million people anticipated to use VR, as compared to 
83.1 million anticipated to use AR at least once per month in 
2020 (Petrock, 2020 ).

2.3. Cybersickness: A continuing obstacle to XR use?
While XR applications are no longer as limited by cost, 
processing speed, or available software, it is possible that 
cybersickness will limit proliferation as much as it did for 
earlier generations of XR technology (Hale & Stanney, 2014 ), 
unless effective countermeasures are implemented. How pre-
valent is cybersickness with current XR? What are the symp -
toms? What causes cybersickness and how can it be 
mitigated? The rest of this paper considers such questions 
and highlights important knowledge gaps requiring further 
study. Our intent is to formulate a broad R&D agenda to 
ensure that the initial promise of XR is realized and to ensure 
that XR is “here to stay” as a valued aspect of training, 
operational support, commerce, and entertainment. 

2.4. User susceptibility to cybersickness
Cybersickness incidence estimates imply that early VR headsets 
(available ca. 1994–2010) elicited adverse symptoms among >60% 
of users during their first exposure, with 40–100% being deemed 
motion sick (depending on the criteria, systems, tasks, and expo -
sure durations across five studies reviewed), 5% quitting prema -
turely, and 5% experiencing no symptoms (Lawson, 2014 ). While 
XR systems have begun proliferating worldwide due to their 
affordability, cybersickness was still observed shortly after the 
introduction of the latest generation of VR headsets, such as the 
Oculus Rift (Serge & Moss, 2015 ). The introduction of these 
headsets addressed some of the headset-related recommendations 
from the Stanney et al. (1998 ) R&D agenda by creating bright, 
low-cost head-worn displays (HWDs). Other desired headset 
features are still lacking, however, such as a wide field-of-view 
(FOV; current displays are still limited to ~100O) that supports 
task performance and presence but is free from cybersickness 
(wider FOV often increases cybersickness; Lin et al., 2002 ). Also 
needed are untethered HWD with as much processing speed as 
their tethered counterparts and further reduction in headset 
weight, as extended wear can still be physically fatiguing.
The 1998 R&D agenda also called for reduced latencies 
(but visual latency issues persist today; see Gruen et al., 
2020 ), establishment of cross-platform software with portabil -
ity (which Unity, Unreal Engine, and other development plat-
forms now support), improved tracking technology (now 
often seamlessly integrated into the VR/AR headset technol -
ogy itself), and creation of better haptic interfaces (tactile and 
force feedback is still rudimentary, but hand tracking and 
gesture recognition have been integrated into some VR/AR 
headsets). While modern multicore processors have made it 
possible to render complex auditory environments over head -
phones integrated into headsets, other senses have yet to be 
incorporated adequately (including, vestibular, chemical, or 
non-haptic somatosensory cues such as body cutaneous and 
kinesthetic stimuli). In fact, it is unlikely that the eXtended 
Reality Turing Test could be passed for any XR scenarios 
involving body locomotion or driving until natural vestibular 
and somatosensory cues are adequately simulated (Lawson & 
Riecke, 2014 ; Middleton et al., 1993 ). Based on these findings 
and considerations, recommendations from the Stanney et al. 
(1998 ) R&D agenda that should be maintained include:
●Create a wide FOV that supports task performance and 
presence but does not elicit cybersickness.
●Create powerful, lightweight, and untethered AR/VR 
HWDs.
●Reduce visual latencies.
●Create peripheral devices for senses beyond vision and 
audition.
What can we conclude about the incidence of cybersick -
ness in newer XR? While cybersickness still occurs in the 
present generation of VR headsets, there is very limited evi-
dence in the literature to enable one to discern whether the incidence of cybersickness has changed versus previous gen-
erations, and it comes from studies designed to elicit at least 
mild symptoms. An update to VR incidence estimates comes 
from a recent dissertation by Stone (2017 ), who observed that 
64/195 (32.8%) of subjects playing one of the three dynamic 
video games (for an average of 9–19 min) using an HTC 
Vive™ (a current generation VR headset) said they “somewhat 
agree” or “strongly agree” that the experience was nauseating 
(with 5.6% saying “strongly agree”). Davis et al. (2015 ) pro-
vided another incidence estimate which applies to adults 
using an Oculus Rift and stimuli consisting of two intention -
ally disturbing roller coaster scenarios. Under that level of 
challenge, at least one of the two coaster simulations caused 
12/12 participants to get mild (or worse) nausea, with 17% 
quitting in one simulation and 66% in the other.
Overall, the limited cybersickness findings with the latest 
HWDs imply that: a) Cybersickness has not been eliminated 
with the newest generation of headsets; b) As with past 
systems, incidence of cybersickness varies greatly (due to 
large differences in devices, stimuli, usage protocols, indivi -
dual physiology, and measures of sickness); c) At least one- 
third of users will experience discomfort during VR usage; d) 
AR usage may be less problematic but more research is 
needed to back this assertion; e) At least 5% of XR users are 
expected to experience severe symptoms in the latest genera -
tion headsets.
One factor that can affect cybersickness incidence is the 
ergonomics of the VR. The Oculus Rift VR headset such as 
that used by Davis et al. is not expected to fit, on average, 16% 
of females and 1% of males based on its interpupillary dis-
tance (IPD) range of adjustment, while the Oculus Quest will 
not fit 7% of females and 1% of males; so while the latest VR 
headsets are closing the IPD mismatch gap, there is still room 
for improvement. When the visual displays in a VR are not 
positioned in front of each eye properly, normal visual accom -
modation and binocular vision are challenged, leading to 
perceptual distortion, eyestrain, headache, etc. While Oculus 
is one of the most accommodating designs in terms of ergo -
nomic fit, any person without a good IPD fit could experience 
greater cybersickness (Stanney et al., 2020 ), and a poor fit is 
more common among people of smaller average stature, such 
as women. Could this be the reason that some past studies 
have claimed that women are more susceptible to cybersick -
ness than men? Stanney et al. (2020 ) noted that another 
popular VR, the HTC Vive VR headset, is not expected to 
fit, on average, ~35% of females and ~16% of males based on 
its adjustable IPD range. This IPD fit/no-fit variable, when 
incorporated into a predictive model of cybersickness, was 
found to be the primary driver of cybersickness recovery 
time, with a secondary driver being motion sickness history 
(Stanney et al., 2020 ). Women have been reported to be more 
susceptible to motion sickness in only 50% of the studies in 
the literature (Lawson, 2014 ), with women being reported 
more susceptible far less often in controlled laboratory studies 
(versus surveys). Stanney et al. concluded that it could be the 
ergonomics of the technology and not sex differences that 
drive cybersickness up in females using certain types of VR. 
Many other confounding factors contribute to observed sex 
differences in motion sickness (Lawson, 2014 ), some of which, 1786
 K. STANNEY ET AL. 
like IPD, imply that not all users are experiencing the same 
stimulus. Thus, presently, it cannot be said definitively that 
women have been proven to be more susceptible to motion 
sickness, nor that, when differences are observed, they are due 
to sex, per se.

